# TIP 106: Add Encoding Abilities to the [dde] Command
	Author:         Harald Oehlmann <harald.oehlmann@elmicron.de>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        13-Aug-2002
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-106-impl
-----

# Abstract

When using Windows DDE communication with non-Tcl programs, the encoding of
the exchanged strings is mostly needed to be the system encoding.  Selection
of this behaviour should be possible with in the **dde** command should be
done by a parameter.

# Specification

Extend the **dde** commands taking a data argument by the switch
**-binary**:

 > **dde execute** ?**-async**? ?**-binary**? _service topic data_

 > **dde poke** ?**-binary**? _service topic item data_

The argument _data_ is taken as a binary string if the **-binary** switch
is given.  Otherwise, it is interpreted as utf-8.

Examples:

	 dde execute -binary CS CS [encoding convertto [encoding system] Äpfel]\0
	 dde poke -binary CS CS I [encoding convertto [encoding system] Äpfel]\0

# Rationale

The communication with DDE with external programs uses the format clipboard
_CF\_TEXT_ and the sent text should be coded in the system encoding
\(_cp1252_ in my locale\).

Most people who use DDE to communicate with, for example, Excel use the fact
that what Excel expects \(_cp1252_\) and what Tcl actually sends \(_utf-8_\)
is identical for 7-bit values and they don't use 8-bit values.  Unfortunately,
characters used in languages like German, French, etc., are located over this
limit and thus are not transferable.

Peter Hardie addressed this point on 2000-10-26 in the Tcl Feature Request at
SourceForge \(\#219185: "dde only handles UTF-8 data \(-binary patch available\)"
<http://sf.net/tracker/?func=detail&aid=219185&group_id=10894&atid=360894> \).
His proposal was to add a **-binary** option.

This is a reasonable solution, because any encoding including the system
encoding may be used as shown in the upper example.

# Reference Implementation

See the _tip-106-impl_ branch in Tcl's fossil repository
<https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?r=tip-106-impl> .

# Rejected Alternatives

I proposed to use a switch ?**-encoding** _encoding_? which would
avoid the preparation of an encoded string by **encoding convertto**.
DDE is so little used at those days so a minimal support is sufficient.

The **dde request** subcommand already has a parameter _-binary_.
It is more logical to extend this to the other commands.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain

