# TIP 108: Summary of Changes to Generic Tcl/Tk Code to Enable Mac OS X Port
	Author:         Jim Ingham <jingham@apple.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Informative
	Vote:           No voting
	Created:        29-Aug-2002
	Post-History:   
-----

# Abstract

The submission of the changes to generic Tcl/Tk necessary for the Mac
OS X port was discussed on the Tcl Core mailing list.  In light of the
very minor changes to shared code involved, and to facilitate
including the port in the 8.4 release, it was decided that we would
not hold a formal vote.  This informational TIP is offered to
summarize the work done, however, and to maintain a more complete
record.

# What Changes are Required for the Mac OS X Port?

These fall into two parts: macosx only changes, and changes that
effect generic code.

The Mac OS X-only changes again fall into two parts.  On the one hand,
we introduced new macosx directories to the Tcl and Tk trees, at the
same level as the win, unix and mac directories.  At present, the
_tcl/macosx_ directory only contains one _.c_ file and a project
file.  The _tk/macosx_ directory is much more substantial.  This set
of changes manifestly only effects this port, and since something is
better than nothing, should be uncontroversial.

The other Mac OS X-only part is the addition of Mac OS X specific
elements to the _.decls_ files.  This should also be
uncontroversial, though I had to add some slightly non-trivial code to
the _genStubs.tcl_ file to handle the fact that Tk loosely uses
"unix" to mean "X11", which for Mac OS X is not the case.

The Tcl side of Mac OS X is clearly unix, but the same Tcl can in fact
be used with X11 \(there is a native X Server in quite common use on
Mac OS X\) and with the Aqua based Tk port.

In the end, however, the stubs generated for the generic, mac, win &
X11 parts of Tcl/Tk are the same, and there is just some extra logic
for the aqua part, so the result effects only Mac OS X code.

The generic code changes are quite small - a testament to the design
of the Tcl/Tk porting layers.

 1. We changed the _configure.in_, _Makefile.in_ and _tcl.m4_ to
    handle building Tcl in a the Framework form that is common on Mac
    OS X.

 2. I added a bit of code \(conditionalized to Mac OS X\) to
    _tclUnixInit.c_ \(in the _TclpSetVariables_ function\) to
    support looking for script files embedded in the Mac OS X
    Framework bundle.  This fits the Mac OS X model better than
    putting files in _/usr/local_ or such-like.

 3. I added a few more elements to the _notifierProcPtr_.  For the
    aqua Tk, we need to swap the Unix notifier with our own, and so we
    needed more control over the notifier than was allowed.  This
    change has no effect if you don't use it, however.

 4. I added a function, _TkGetFirstTextLayout_, which gets the run
    of text up the the first wrap.  I have to get this because the Mac
    OS X button control doesn't like a newline in the button text.  It
    is a private function, however, so it doesn't cause any
    incompatibilities.

 5. We had to change various places in the Tk script code and the
    demos where the implicit assumption was made that [string equal
    $tcl\_platform\(platform\) "unix"] meant you were using X11.  To
    this end, we will add a _windowingsystem_ subcommand to the
    _tk_ command, and then using it to replace the cases where
    _tcl\_platform_ was being erroneously checked.  This command will
    return "x11" for an X11 server, "aqua" for the native Mac OS X
    window manager, "win32" for Windows, and "classic" for Classic
    MacOS.

# Reference Implementation

The reference implementation is on the _macosx-8-4-branch_ in the
SourceForge CVS repository.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

