# TIP 111: Dictionary Values and Manipulators
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@man.ac.uk>
	Author:         David S. Cargo <dcargo@marix.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        05-Oct-2002
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
	Tcl-Ticket:     654893
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes adding a standard value format \(and supporting
commands\) to Tcl that implements a value-to-value mapping, just as
Tcl's list values can be regarded as implementing a number-to-value
mapping.

# Rationale

What is a dictionary?  It is a translation from arbitrary values to
arbitrary values, often also known as an associative map.  Many
computer languages, especially higher-level ones, have them as part of
the language or the standard library.  It would be nice to have them
in Tcl too.

Now, I realise that Tcl already contains arrays which provide
dictionary functionality, but they are not quite the same thing.
Tcl's arrays are collections of variables indexable by name, and not
collections of values.  This has some far-reaching implications; it is
possible to set traces on individual elements of the array, but it is
not possible to pass the array by value.  However, one of the main
concerns is the sheer cost of arrays in terms of memory space; aside
from the hash table used as the core of the implementation \(and the
representations of the keys and values, of course\) there is a
substantial overhead for each array to support traces on the array as
a whole, plus a similar overhead _per element_ that stems from the
fact that elements are variables in their own right.  By contrast, a
dictionary value should be a lot more frugal.

# Value Syntax and Semantics

Naturally, it is desirable for dictionary values to have
human-readable forms that are similar to those that currently exist.
I propose using _key value key value ..._ form with list-style
quoting for keys and values that contain characters that are
significant to Tcl, which should be immediately familiar to users of
the **array get** and **array set** commands.  No special
interpretation will be placed on the amount of whitespace separating
keys and values, just as with lists \(indeed, any list with an even
number of elements can be regarded as a dictionary.\)  For example, the
following value represents a mapping from selected languages to a
possible program to invoke to compile them:

		C gcc C++ g++ FORTRAN f77 Java javac

Empty dictionaries are those that contain no mappings from keys to
values.  Any representation of an empty list will also be a
representation of an empty dictionary.  There is no upper bound on the
number of items that a dictionary may hold.

It should be specially noted that dictionary values have copy-on-write
semantics just like lists.  This means that if I hand a dictionary
value into a procedure as an argument, and that procedure updates the
variable containing that value, the value as seen by the caller will
not have changed.  This is in complete contrast with arrays which
cannot \(currently\) be passed by value other than through using **array
get** to convert the array to a list form and **array set** to convert
back again.

This specification does not state what order the keys and values are
listed in.  That depends on the implementation.

# Command Syntax and Semantics

I propose that all operations that work with dictionary values \(where
not done through adaptations of existing commands\) will go through the
**dict** command.  The alternatives are "array" which is already in
use, "dictionary" which is rather long for what I believe will be a
fairly commonly used command, "alist" \(association list\) which is
probably too easy to confuse with existing commands, and "map" which
is probably better reserved for future use as something for applying
an operation to a list \(or other collection of values\), "hash" \(which
is perhaps too common\), and "table" \(which is used for this type of
data structure in the Icon programming language\).

Most subcommands operate on either a dictionary value \(_exists_,
_for_, _get_, _info_, _keys_, _remove_, _replace_,
_size_, and _values_\), or on a variable containing a dictionary
value \(_append_, _incr_, _lappend_, _set_, and _unset_\).

Proposed subcommands:

 dict create:	Make a dictionary.

 > **dict create** ?_key1 value1 key2 value2 ..._?

 > This will create a new dictionary from the given keys and values
   and return it as the result.  The command will take an even number
   of arbitrary strings \(or other objects, naturally\) and will use the
   first, third, fifth, etc. as keys and the second, fourth, sixth,
   etc. as values.  From the point of view of string representations,
   this command will behave the same as the **list** command with an
   even number of arguments.  There is no restriction on the possible
   representations of keys or values.  It is legal to call this
   command with no arguments at all, which creates an empty
   dictionary.

 dict get:	Get value for given key.

 > **dict get** _dictionaryValue_ ?_key ..._?

 > Given a dictionary value \(first argument\) and a key \(second
   argument\), this will retrieve the value for that key.  Where
   several keys are supplied, the behaviour of the command shall be as
   if the result of **dict get** _dictVal key_ was passed as the first
   argument to **dict get_ with the remaining arguments as second
   \(and possibly subsequent\) arguments.  This facilitates lookups in
   nested dictionaries.  For example, the following two commands are
   equivalent:

		dict get $dict foo bar spong
		dict get [dict get [dict get $dict foo] bar] spong

 > If no keys are provided, dict would return a list containing pairs
   of elements in a manner similar to **array get**.  That is, the
   first element of each pair would be the key and the second element
   would be the value for that key.

 > It is an error to attempt to retrieve a value for a key that is not
   present in the dictionary.

 dict replace:	Create a new dictionary that is a copy of an old one
		except with some values different or some extra
		key/value pairs added.

 > **dict replace** _dictionaryValue_ ?_key value ..._?

 > This is very much the analogue of **lreplace**, taking a dictionary
   value as its first argument and then a list of key/value pairs.
   The result of the command is a new dictionary value that is a copy
   of the supplied dictionary other than that whenever a key is one of
   those supplied to this command, the returned dictionary will map
   that key to the associated value.  It is legal for this command to
   be called with no key/value pairs, but illegal for this command to
   be called with a key but no value.

 dict remove:	Create a new dictionary that is a copy of an old one
		except without the key/value mappings whose keys are
		listed.

 > **dict remove** _dictionaryValue_ ?_key key ..._?

 > This operation does what **dict replace** can't do; removes keys
   and values.  The result of the command is a new dictionary value
   that does not contain mappings for any of the keys listed; it is
   not an error if either there are no keys listed, or if any of the
   listed keys does not exist in the supplied dictionary.

 dict set:	Set value for given key in a dictionary in a variable.

 > **dict set** _dictionaryVar key_ ?_key ..._? _value_

 > This operation takes the name of a variable containing a dictionary
   value and places an updated dictionary value in that variable
   containing a mapping from the given key to the given value.  In a
   manner analogous to **lset**, where multiple keys are present, they
   do indexing into nested dictionaries.

 dict unset:	Remove association for given key in a dictionary in a
		variable.

 > **dict unset** _dictionaryVar key_ ?_key ..._?

 > This operation takes the name of a variable containing a dictionary
   value and places an updated dictionary value in that variable that
   does not contain a mapping for the given key.  Where multiple keys
   are present, this describes a path through nested dictionaries to
   the mapping to remove.  At least one key must be specified.

 dict keys:	List all keys \(with optional criteria matching\) in
		dictionary.

 > **dict keys** _dictionaryValue_ ?_globPattern_?

 > Return a list of all keys in the given dictionary value.  If a
   pattern is supplied, only those keys that match it \(according to
   the rules of **string match**\) will be returned.  The returned keys
   will be in an arbitrary implementation-specific order.

 dict values:	List all values \(with optional criteria matching\) in
		the dictionary.

 > **dict values** _dictionaryValue_ ?_globPattern_?

 > Return a list of all values in the given dictionary value.  If a
   pattern is supplied, only those values that match it \(according to
   the rules of **string match**\) will be returned.  The returned keys
   will be in an arbitrary implementation-specific order, though where
   no pattern is supplied the _i_th key returned by **dict keys**
   will be the key for the _i_th value returned by **dict values**
   applied to the same dictionary value.

 dict for:	Iterate across all key/value mappings in the
		dictionary.

 > **dict for** \{_keyVar valueVar_\} _dictionaryValue body_

 > This takes three arguments, the first a pair of variable names \(for
   the key and value respectively of each mapping in the dictionary\),
   the second the dictionary value to iterate across, and the third a
   script to be evaluated for each mapping with the key and value
   variables set appropriately \(in the manner of **foreach**.\)  The
   result of the command is an empty string.  If any evaluation of the
   body generates a _TCL\_BREAK_ result, no further pairs from the
   dictionary will be iterated over and the **dict for** command will
   terminate successfully immediately.  If any evaluation of the body
   generates a _TCL\_CONTINUE_ result, this shall be treated exactly
   like a normal _TCL\_OK_ result.

 dict filter:	Create a new dictionary from an old one containing just
		a selection of key/value pairs.

 > **dict filter** _dictionaryValue_ **key** _globPattern_

 > **dict filter** _dictionaryValue_ **value** _globPattern_

 > **dict filter** _dictionaryValue_ **script** \{_keyVar valueVar_\} _script_

 > This takes a dictionary value and returns a new dictionary that
   contains just those key/value pairs that match the specified rule.
   Three rules are outlined above.  The **key** rule only matches those
   key/value pairs whose keys match the given glob-style pattern.  The
   **value** rule only matches those key/value pairs whose values match
   the given glob-style pattern.  The **script** rule tests for matching
   by assigning the key to the _keyVar_ and the value to the
   _valueVar_, and then evaluating the given script which should
   return a boolean value \(with the key/value pair only being included
   in the result of the **dict filter** when a true value is returned.\)

 dict append:	Append a string to the value for a particular key in
		the dictionary.

 > **dict append** _dictionaryVar key_ ?_string ..._?

 > This appends the given string \(or strings\) to the value that the
   given key maps to in the dictionary value contained in the given
   variable, writing the resulting dictionary value back to that
   variable.  Non-existent keys are treated as if they map to an empty
   string.

 dict incr:	Increment the value for a particular key in the
		dictionary.

 > **dict incr** _dictionaryVar key_ ?_increment_?

 > This adds the given increment value \(an integer that defaults to 1
   if not specified\) to the value that the given key maps to in the
   dictionary value contained in the given variable, writing the
   resulting dictionary value back to that variable.  Non-existent
   keys are treated as if they map to 0.  It is an error to increment
   a value for an existing key if that value is not an integer.

 dict lappend:	Append an item to the list-value for a particular key
		in the dictionary.

 > **dict lappend** _dictionaryVar key_ ?_item ..._?

 > This appends the given items to the list value that the given key
   maps to in the dictionary value contained in the given variable,
   writing the resulting dictionary value back to that variable.
   Non-existent keys are treated as if they map to an empty list, and
   it is legal for there to be no items to append to the list.  It is
   an error for the value that the key maps to to not be representable
   as a list.

 dict exists:	Test whether a mapping exists for a key.

 > **dict exists** _dictionaryValue key_ ?_key ..._?

 > This returns a boolean value indicating whether the given key \(or
   path of keys through a set of nested dictionaries\) exists in the
   given dictionary value.  This returns a true value exactly when
   **dict get** on that path will succeed.

 dict size:	Get the number of key/value mappings in a dictionary.

 > **dict size** _dictionaryValue_

 > This returns the size of the dictionary, which will be exactly half
   the value that **llength** _dictionaryValue_ would return.  It is an
   error to apply this command to a non-dictionary value.

 dict info:	Get implementation-specific information about the
		dictionary value.

 > **dict info** _dictionaryValue_

 > This returns information \(intended for display to people\) about the
   given dictionary though the format of this data is dependent on the
   implementation of the dictionary.  For dictionaries that are
   implemented by hash tables, it is expected that this will return
   the string produced by _Tcl\_HashStats\(\)_.

# Other Related Changes

There are a few other commands that change:

 * **array set** will take a dictionary instead of \(or as well as\) a
   list as its final argument.

 * **array get** will return a dictionary.

 * **string map** will take a dictionary instead of \(or as well as\) a
   list as its map argument.

Naturally, dictionary handling will form its own maintenance area.  [[16]](16.md) and [[24]](24.md) will be updated as necessary.

# C API

There will be a new public structure and a few new public functions to
allow C-level access to dictionary values:

The new structure \(called _Tcl\_DictSearch_\) will be there to allow
for searches \(i.e. traversals\) of a dictionary.  This TIP does not
specify the fields of the structure; the declaration is just to allow
for allocation of these structures on the C stack.

Many public API functions are capable of generating error messages;
these generally indicate some type-conversion failure.  Sharing
constraint violations \(where applicable\) cause panics as they indicate
basic programming errors which should not be causable by scripts.  The
public API functions are:

 > Tcl\_Obj \***Tcl\_NewDictObj**\(void\);

 > Tcl\_Obj \***Tcl\_DbNewDictObj**\(CONST char \*_file_, int _line_\);

These functions \(in non-debug and debug versions\) create a new
dictionary object and return it.

 > int **Tcl\_DictObjPut**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Obj \*_dictPtr_,
	Tcl\_Obj \*_keyPtr_, Tcl\_Obj \*_valuePtr_\);

This function inserts a new key/value pair into a dictionary, or
updates a key/value pair already in the dictionary.  The dictionary
object must be unshared.  Note that both the key and value objects
will have their reference count increased.  The return value is a
normal TCL\_OK/TCL\_ERROR result, with the _interp_ for error
reporting.

 > int **Tcl\_DictObjGet**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Obj \*_dictPtr_,
	Tcl\_Obj \*_keyPtr_, Tcl\_Obj \*\*_valuePtrPtr_\);

This function looks up the value for a key in a dictionary.  The
variable pointed to by the _valuePtrPtr_ argument is updated to
contain a reference to the value, or a NULL if there is no mapping for
the key in the dictionary.  No reference counts are manipulated by
this function.  The return value is a normal TCL\_OK/TCL\_ERROR result,
with the _interp_ for error reporting.

 > int **Tcl\_DictObjRemove**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Obj \*_dictPtr_,
	Tcl\_Obj \*_keyPtr_\);

This function removes the key/value pair with the given key from the
dictionary.  It is not an error if the key is not present in the
dictionary.  The dictionary must be unshared.  The return value is a
normal TCL\_OK/TCL\_ERROR result, with the _interp_ for error
reporting.

 > int **Tcl\_DictObjSize**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Obj \*_dictPtr_,
	int \*_sizePtr_\);

This function updates the integer variable pointed to by _sizePtr_
with the number of key/value pairs in the dictionary.  The return
value is a normal TCL\_OK/TCL\_ERROR result, with the _interp_ for
error reporting.

 > int **Tcl\_DictObjFirst**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Obj \*_dictPtr_,
	Tcl\_DictSearch \*_searchPtr_,
	Tcl\_Obj \*\*_keyPtrPtr_, Tcl\_Obj \*\*_valuePtrPtr_, int \*_donePtr_\);

This function starts a search of \(i.e. iteration over\) the given
dictionary, using the structure pointed to by _searchPtr_ as
context.  The return value is a normal TCL\_OK/TCL\_ERROR result, with
the _interp_ for error reporting.  Three variables are updated to
indicate what was found; _keyPtrPtr_ is used for reporting the key
of a key/value pair and _valuePtrPtr_ is used for reporting the
corresponding value.  Finally, _donePtr_ is used for indicating
whether the search has found all the values; if the variable it points
to is set to 1 there are no key/value pairs in the dictionary
\(i.e. the variables pointed to by _keyPtrPtr_ and _valuePtrPtr_
were not updated\), but if the variable is set to 0, a key/value pair
was found and _Tcl\_DictObjNext\(\)_ should be called to discover
whether that was the last value or if there are further ones in the
dictionary.  Note that if this function indicates that the search is
not done but the calling code wishes to extract no further values from
the dictionary, _Tcl\_DictObjDone\(\)_ _must_ be called to release
the internal locks on the representation of the value.

 > void **Tcl\_DictObjNext**\(Tcl\_DictSearch \*_searchPtr_,
	Tcl\_Obj \*\*_keyPtrPtr_, Tcl\_Obj \*\*_valuePtrPtr_, int \*_donePtr_\);

This function gets the next key/value pair from the search of a
dictionary, using the search referenced by _searchPtr_.  The meaning
of the _keyPtrPtr_, _valuePtrPtr_ and _donePtr_ variables is
much the same as in _Tcl\_DictObjFirst\(\)_, along with the restriction
that if the function indicates that the search is not done but the
calling code wishes to extract no further values from the dictionary,
_Tcl\_DictObjDone\(\)_ _must_ be called to release the internal locks
on the representation of the value.

 > void **Tcl\_DictObjDone**\(Tcl\_DictSearch \*_searchPtr_\);

This function terminates a search of a dictionary before all the
values in the dictionary have been iterated over, releasing the
internal locks on the dictionary representation.

 > int **Tcl\_DictObjPutKeyList**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Obj \*_dictPtr_,
	int _keyc_, Tcl\_Obj \*CONST \*_keyv_, Tcl\_Obj \*_valuePtr_\);

This function is a variant on _Tcl\_DictObjPut\(\)_ that takes a list
of keys so as to work with nested dictionaries.

 > int **Tcl\_DictObjRemoveKeyList**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Obj \*_dictPtr_,
	int _keyc_, Tcl\_Obj \*CONST \*_keyv_\);

This function is a variant on _Tcl\_DictObjRemove\(\)_ that takes a
list of keys so as to work with nested dictionaries.

# Examples

Counting the number of unique words in a file and the number of times
each word occurs:

	set f [open someFile.txt]
	set contents [read $f]
	close $f
	foreach word [regexp -all -inline {\w+} $contents] {
	   dict incr count $word
	}
	puts "There are [dict size $count] unique words."
	foreach word [lsort -dictionary [dict keys $count]] {
	   puts "${word}: [dict get $count $word] occurrences"
	}

A localisable **string toupper** implementation:

	set capital [dict create C [dict create]]
	foreach c {abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz} {
	   dict set capital C $c [string toupper $c]
	}
	dict set capital en [dict get $capital C]
	# ... and so on for other supported languages ...
	set upperCase [string map [dict get $capital $env(LANG)] $string

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

----

# Appendices

_These appendices are not formally part of the proposal and exist
merely to help understanding._

# ~ Implementation Notes

Implement using hash tables \(of course.\)  Need efficient ways to
convert to/from lists, perhaps making lists know what's going on
underneath the covers?

# ~ Future Directions

Alternate implementations of mappings, like trees or disk-backed
databases?

