# TIP 115: Making Tcl Truly 64-Bit Ready
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@man.ac.uk>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        23-Oct-2002
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    9.0
	Obsoleted-By:   494
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes changes to Tcl to make it operate more effectively
on 64-bit systems.

# Rationale

It is a fact of life that 64-bit platforms are becoming more common.
While once the assumption that virtually everything was a 32-bit
machine \(where not smaller\) was valid, this is no longer the case.
Particularly on modern supercomputers \(though increasingly in
workstations and high-end desktop systems too\), the amount of memory
that the machine contains is exceeding 2GB, and the need to address
very large amounts of memory is certainly there in scientific and
engineering applications.  And where they lead, consumer systems will
probably follow too.

At the moment, Tcl is ill-prepared for this.  In particular, the type
used for expressing sizes of entities in Tcl \(whether strings, lists
or undifferentiated blocks of memory\) is _int_ \(and cannot be made
into an _unsigned int_ in most of those places where it is not
already an unsigned value\) but on the majority of 64-bit platforms
this is still a 32-bit type, which is a major restriction.  However,
on the vast majority of those platforms _long_ is a 64-bit type, and
so a suitable replacement.  \(The exceptions to this are the Alpha - but
that is unusual in that both _int_ and _long_ are 64-bit types
there, meaning that the platform will be unaffected by such an
alteration - and Win64, which has a 32-bit _long_ but 64-bit
pointers.\)

Luckily, standards like POSIX have already been dealing with this
problem before us, and the types _size\_t_ \(which is unsigned\) and
_ssize\_t_ \(which is signed\) exist for the sorts of uses we're
interested in \(i.e. they are both the same size as each other, and
_size\_t_ is large enough to describe the size of any allocatable
memory chunk.\)

# Details of Changes

The key changes will be to change the lengths of the following types
from _int_ to _ssize\_t_ in all appropriate places, and _unsigned
int_ to _size\_t_ likewise \(mainly in memory allocation routines.\)

 * _Tcl\_Obj_ - the _length_ member.  \(Potentially the _refCount_
   member needs updating as well, but that's less critical.\)

 * _Tcl\_SavedResult_ - the _appendAvl_ and _appendUsed_ members.

 * _Tcl\_DString_ - the _length_ and _spaceAvl_ members.

 * _Tcl\_Token_ - the _size_ and _numComponents_ members.

 * _Tcl\_Parse_ - the _commentSize_, _commandSize_, numWords_,
   _numTokens_ and _tokensAvailable_ members.

 * _CompiledLocal_ - the _nameLength_ member.

 * _Interp_ - the _appendAvl_, _appendUsed_ and _termOffset_
   members.

 * _List_ - the _maxElemCount_ and _elemCount_ members.

 * _ByteArray_ - the _used_ and _allocated_ members.

 * _SortElement_ - the _count_ member.

 * _SortInfo_ - the _index_ member.

 * _CopyState_ - the _toRead_ and _total_ members.

 * _GetsState_ - the _rawRead_, _bytesWrote_, _charsWrote_ and
   _totalChars_ members.

 * _ParseInfo_ - the _size_ member.

 * _String_ - the _numChars_ member \(see also the _TestString_
   structure.\)

Changes to the bytecode-related structures might be worthwhile doing
too, though there are more backward-compatibility issues there.

These changes will force many of the types used in the public API to
change as well.  Notable highlights:

 * _Tcl\_Alloc_ will now take an _size\_t_.

 * _Tcl\_GetByteArrayFromObj_ will now take a pointer to a _ssize\_t_.

 * _Tcl\_GetStringFromObj_ will now take a pointer to a _ssize\_t_.

 * _Tcl\_ListObjLength_ will now take a pointer to a _ssize\_t_.

 * _Tcl\_GetUnicodeFromObj_ will now take a pointer to a _ssize\_t_.

In the internal API, the following notable change will happen:

 * _TclGetIntForIndex_ will now take a pointer to a _ssize\_t_.

There are probably other similar API changes required.

# What This TIP Does Not Do

This TIP does not rearrange structure orderings.  Although this would
be very useful for some common structures \(notably _Tcl\_Obj_\) if the
common arithmetic types were smaller than the word size, it turns out
that the changes in types required to deal with larger entities will
make these rearrangements largely unnecessary and/or pointless.
\(Inefficiency in statically-allocated structures won't matter as the
number of instances will remain comparatively small, even in very
large programs.\)  Once the changes are applied, there is typically at
most a single _int_ field per structure, usually holding either a
reference count, a set of flags, or a Tcl result code.

It should also be noted that all structures are always going to be
correctly aligned internally as we never use C's bitfield support, so
structure alignment is purely an issue of efficiency, and not of correct
access to the fields.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

