# TIP 116: More Safety for Large Images
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@man.ac.uk>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        28-Oct-2002
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
-----

# Abstract

This TIP alters the C API for Tk's images so that failures to allocate
sufficient memory for a large image can be handled more gracefully
than a straight _panic\(\)_.

# Rationale

Tk's image mechanism is nice and flexible, but it can run into
problems with a large image.  If we consider a square image that is
2000 pixels on each side \(such sizes of images are becoming more
common with the increasing popularity and sophistication of digital
photography\), we find it requires about 16MB of memory to load \(4
million pixels, four bytes per pixel\) but obviously just because an
application fails to load that image \(or something even larger\), it
doesn't mean that the best course of action is a _panic\(\)_-induced
crash.  Instead, a graceful failure back to the Tcl interpreter would
allow for scripts to find a way to report this low-memory situation in
a way that users can understand.

The problem with this is that for many of the routes through the Tk
image API, there is no way to report a memory allocation failure;
currently, the only failure mode is total.  This TIP changes this.

# Proposed Changes

I propose making the following functions that currently return
_void_ return _int_ instead and that they should additionally take
a standard _Tcl\_Interp \*interp_ argument to allow an error message
describing the failure \(currently only due to insufficient memory\) to
be added to the current interpreter.  It will not be an error for the
_interp_ argument to be _NULL_, though it will be up to the caller
to guess why the failure happened.

 * _Tk\_PhotoExpand_ will become:

		int
		Tk_PhotoExpand(Tcl_Interp *interp, Tk_PhotoHandle handle,
		               int width, int height)

 * _Tk\_PhotoPutBlock_ will become:

		int
		Tk_PhotoPutBlock(Tcl_Interp *interp, Tk_PhotoHandle handle,
		                 Tk_PhotoImageBlock *blockPtr,
		                 int x, int y, int width, int height, int compRule)

 * _Tk\_PhotoPutZoomedBlock_ will become:

		int
		Tk_PhotoPutZoomedBlock(Tcl_Interp *interp, Tk_PhotoHandle handle,
		                       Tk_PhotoImageBlock *blockPtr,
		                       int x, int y, int width, int height,
		                       int zoomX, int zoomY, int subsampleX, int subsampleY,
		                       int compRule)

 * _Tk\_PhotoSetSize_ will become:

		int
		Tk_PhotoSetSize(Tcl_Interp *interp, Tk_PhotoHandle handle,
		                int width, int height)

Also note that as a consequence of this, some image-related Tk
commands will also gain additional error return situations.  Since
these all trigger abnormal process termination \(and potentially a
core-dump too\) at the moment, this change in behaviour is believed to
be wholly beneficial.

# Backward Compatibility

This TIP also proposes a backward compatibility interface, so that
extensions need not be heavily modified to work with new versions of
Tk.  This is done by leaving backwardly-compatible functions in the
old locations in Tk's stub table and adding a _\#define_ to allow
selection of the old API with the standard names.  I propose doing this
when the symbol _USE\_PANIC\_ON\_PHOTO\_ALLOC\_FAILURE_ is defined; like
this, extension authors can switch from compiling with Tk 8.4 to using
later versions by adding just one flag to their makefile \(or other build
script/environment.\)

Note that this interacts with the backward-compatability interface
defined in [[98]](98.md); if that is enabled, the back-compat interface defined
here is enabled as well.

# Sample Implementation

<http://sf.net/tracker/?func=detail&aid=646382&group\_id=12997&atid=312997>

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

