# TIP 119: Angled Text on a Canvas
	Author:         Simon Geard <simon.geard@ntlworld.com>
	Author:		Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        18-Nov-2002
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
	Tk-Ticket:      1611359
-----

# Abstract

The current text object on a canvas does not support the creation of
text strings at an arbitrary angle.  For some applications this is
limitation is sufficiently serious to disqualify Tk from use.  This
TIP removes this restriction.

# Rationale

Using a Tk canvas to display e.g. an engineering drawing from a CAD
application is limited - such applications will output angled text and
there is simply no way of displaying such text on a canvas.

Another consideration is the competition.  Both Qt and Java canvas
objects support angled text on their canvas object - most new users
would I believe be surprised to discover that this functionality is not
supported.

Due to the internal architecture of Tk a side effect of this work
would be to enable buttons \(and possibly other widgets\) to have their
text written at an angle as well.  This TIP does not expose that
functionality.

# Implementation

At the command level there would be an extra attribute, _-angle_,
added to the canvas's text object:

	<canvas> create text <x> <y> -text <str> ?-angle <angle>? ...

where the angle is specified in degrees.  Manipulation of the angle
would be done in the usual way through the _itemconfigure_ and
_itemcget_ subcommands:

	<canvas> itemconfigure <tag> -angle <angle>

Note that PostScript naturally supports rotation of text.

# Reference Implementation

I have done an initial assessment of the amount of work required and
have and have created a patch to implement it in Tk 8.4.5 .  This
initial work was fairly straightforward but the internal housekeeping
work maintaining and interacting with an angled box will be more
substantial.  The patch \(uploaded to SourceForge
<http://sf.net/tracker/?func=detail&aid=1611359&group_id=12997&atid=312997> \) is
for X only.  It doesn't use any X extensions and should work for X11R3
and above.  I don't know how it would be done on non-X systems but
hopefully they'll \(Win & MacOS at least\) provide native tools to make
their implementation straightforward as well.

## Implementation Notes

The implementation was tricky to develop, because it was wholly different on
each rendering platform \(X11 is two, depending on which font rendering engine
is used\). This delayed implementation of this TIP for a whole release.

 Classic X11: Uses a general monochrome pixmap rotation engine.

 X11 \+ Xft: Generates rotated versions of the fonts by installing a rotation
   matrix, caching them in the subfont management engine.

 Win32: Generates rotated versions of the fonts using the built-in font
   rotation suport, caching them in the subfont management engine.

 MacOS X: Applies the rotation to the Current Transformation Matrix
   immediately before rendering.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

