# TIP 120: Restricted DDE Services
	Author:         Pat Thoyts <patthoyts@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        04-Dec-2002
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
	Tcl-Ticket:     649859
-----

# Abstract

This TIP will enhance the DDE package for use with safe interpreters
and allow programmer control of the commands exposed by the DDE
service.

# Rationale

By default the Tcl DDE service exposes all of the commands and
variables available in the interpreter to all DDE clients.  This is
not always desirable.  One solution might be to load the package into
a safe slave interpreter and use [interp alias] to expose the
required commands.  Unfortunately the package doesn't support loading
into safe interpreters.

# Proposed Changes

Firstly, this TIP proposes a _-handler_ option to the [dde
servername] sub-command.  The argument for this option should be the
name of a procedure that will authenticate and evaluate DDE requests.

Secondly, the DDE package should be enhanced to be capable of
providing a service within a safe interpreter.

# New Option

The new syntax will be _dde servername ?-handler command?
servername_.  To permit introspection we will accept _dde servername
-handler_ which will return the handler name \(if any\).  If a
servername must be defined using an initial hyphen then the standard
'--' separator can be used.

The dde request is appended to the handler command \(which may be a list\)
and then evaluated in the global context. This ensures that all unsafe
elements will not be evaluated before the handler code has a chance to
examine them. So

	 proc handler {request} {
	    if {[string match "info *" $request} {
	       uplevel #0 [lindex $request 0] [lrange $request 1 end]
	    } else
	       return -code error "permission denied"
	    }
	 }

The above handler will permit [info vars] but will fail when trying
[info vars ; bad_proc] with info complaining about the wrong number
of parameters. Passing a single string means that we can handle
standard dde styles of requests, for instance 
'Open\("c:\\Program Files\\prog.exe"\)' which would not usefully convert
into a list.

# Safe DDE

The dde package should support loading within a safe interpreter but
with the following constraints.

 * The dde command should be hidden.  This means that the safe
   interpreter may not call the command but a master interpreter call
   this command within the context of the safe interpreter.

 * Remote execution requests should be handled _only_ by a defined
   handler procedure.  The normal default is to evaluate a remote
   execution request in the global namespace.  I propose that when
   operating in a safe interpreter that the request be denied unless a
   handler is defined.  The programmer then has the ability to
   authenticate the request before it is evaluated.

 * Remote variable reads should be denied.  Rather that add in another
   handler - the XTYP\_REQUEST service command should be denied for
   safe interpreters.  It is trivial to use [dde eval Remote set
   $varname] to read the value of a variable.

# Reference Implementation

See the SourceForge Feature Request at
<https://sourceforge.net/tracker/index.php?func=detail&aid=649859&group\_id=10894&atid=310894>

# Example

	 # Provide a handler that only allows the [info] command
	 # Note: This runs in the master interp.
	 proc restricted_handler {request} {
	    if {[string match "info *" $request} {
	       uplevel #0 [lindex $request 0] [lrange $request 1 end]
	    } else
	       return -code error "permission denied"
	    }
	 }
	
	 # Create a safe slave interpreter and expose as a DDE service.
	 safe::interpCreate slave
	 slave invokehidden load tcldde12d.dll Dde
	 slave invokehidden dde servername -handler dde_cmd SafeSlave
	 interp alias slave dde_cmd {} restricted_handler
	
	 # If testing in tclsh...
	 set ::_waiting 0 ; after 20000 {set ::_waiting 1} ; vwait ::_waiting

# Consequences

There should be no change to current users of this package unless they
are using a server name beginning with a hyphen.  In this case they
will need to insert '--' before the server name.

# Copyright

This document is hereby placed in the public domain.

