# TIP 123: Adding an Exponentiation Operator to the [expr] Command
	Author:         Arjen Markus <arjen.markus@wldelft.nl>
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@man.ac.uk>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        16-Dec-2002
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       mathematics,evaluation
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
	Tcl-Ticket:     655176
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to add a new operator to the operators recognised by
the [expr] command: the exponentiation operator.  This operator will
enhance the functionality of the current _pow\(\)_ function by
returning a result that depends on the type of its operands.  It will
also make complicated formulae more readable.

# Introduction

Currently Tcl's [expr] command uses the exponentiation function
_pow\(\)_ to calculate such expressions as "2 to the power 10".  The
drawback of this is twofold:

 * Expressions using several exponentiations become difficult to read.
   For instance, a third-degree polynomial looks like:

		 2.0*pow($x,3) - 1.2*pow($x,2) + 3.0*$x + 4.0

	 > or:

		 2.0*$x*$x*$x - 1.2*$x*$x + 3.0*$x + 4.0

 * The result of raising an integer to an integer power is a
   double: 2 to the power 10 is 1024.0, not 1024.

Other languages, like for instance FORTRAN, use an operator instead of
a function.  Two operators are commonly found: \*\* and ^.  As the
latter already has a meaning within the [expr] command, we propose
to add the "\*\*" operator instead.  The above example would become:

	 2.0*$x**3 - 1.2*$x**2 + 3.0*$x + 4.0

# Mathematical Details

The implementation of the exponentiation operator will have the
following properties \(below we refer to the expression _$x\*\*$y_\):

If _x_ and _y_ are both integers \(ordinary or wide\):

 * The result is of the same type as the widest operand

 * An error is raised if the operation makes no mathematical sense,
   _0\*\*\(-1\)_ for instance.

 * If _x_ has the value 0, then:

	 > \* if _y > 0_, the result is 0

	 > \* if _y < 0_, the result is an error

	 > \* if _y == 0_, the result is 1

 * If _x_ has the value 1, then the result is always 1

 * If _y_ has the value 0, the result is always 1

 * If _x_ has a negative value lower than -1 and _y < 0_, the
   result is 0

 * If _x_ has the value -1, then depending on whether _y_ is even
   or odd, the result is 1 or -1 \(respectively.\)

 * For all other combinations, the value is "_x_ raised to the power
   _y_"

 * When evaluating this, no attention is paid to overflow, even though
   the result might fit into a wide integer \(though of course the
   result will be a wide integer if either operand was wide.\)  This is
   in accordance with the type model used in other [expr] operators.

If either _x_ or _y_ is a double, the C function _pow\(\)_ is used
to compute the result.

The following expressions are parsed and evaluated in accordance with
all other operators:

	 $x ** $y ** $z ==> ($x ** $y ) ** $z
	 $x ** -1       ==> ($x ** (-1))

The precedence of the exponentiation operator is thus _higher_ than
the multiplication, division and remainder operations and lower than
the unary operations, in accordance with common definitions.

# Sample Implementation

<http://sf.net/tracker/?func=detail&aid=655176&group\_id=10894&atid=310894>

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain.

