# TIP 125: Converting between Frame and Toplevel Windows
	Author:         Brian Griffin <bgriffin@model.com>
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@man.ac.uk>
	Author:         Sacha Schär <sacha.schaer@unibas.ch>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        20-Jan-2003
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       reparent,Tk
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
	Tk-Ticket:      998125
-----

# Abstract

This TIP modifies the **wm** command to act as a geometry manager for
Frames, allowing them to become Toplevel windows.

# Rationale

One of the usability features introduced recently in many windowing systems,
is the ability to "tear out" or "insert" sub-frames and panes within an
application. The most common form of this is the ability to tear off a
toolbar, making it an independent window. This feature gives the end user the
ability to configure the application in ways that best suit them and improve
their overall productivity.

Currently there is no mechanism with Tk to move a widget subtree to a new
toplevel parent without reconstructing the hierarchy from scratch. The basic
command will give the Tk programmer the ability to implement megawidgets that
support tear-off toolbars, notebooks, etc., since the children widgets of the
frame will follow along, unchanged.

An alternative approach has been taken from the orignal **wm toplevel**
proposal as described here:

In Tk, Toplevel windows are basically a special form of a Frame which are
managed by the window manager. The proposal is to add the commands **wm
manage** and **wm forget** which will take an arbitrary Frame and allow it
to be managed by the window manager, making it a Toplevel window.

There are three configure options of Toplevel that are not present on a frame,
**-menu**, **-screen**, and **-use**. The options **-screen** and
**-use** can only be specified when a Toplevel is created and cannot be
modified later. The **-menu** option can be modified after widget creation
and should be available on a frame so that when the frame is managed as a
Toplevel, the menu can be present, therefore, this option has been added to
the Frame widget. When a frame is not managed as a toplevel, the **-menu**
option is ignored.

Note: because of special conditions of Toplevel, it is necessary to restrict
them to only be managed by the window manager; they cannot be converted to
frames and therefore, **wm forget** is not allowed on a Toplevel widget.

# Reference Implementation

TkToolkit patch \#998125 implements the **wm manage** and **wm forget**
commands on Unix and Windows. A partial MacOSX implementation is also
provided. This implementation only works for buttons and menubuttons. For the
remaining Tk widgets to be present in a **wm manage**'d frame, the widgets
need to recognize and implement the TK\_URBAN\_RENEWAL flag.

The original **wm toplevel** implementation can be obtained
[ftp://ftp.model.com/pub/tcl/reframe], with patch files as well as Linux and
Win32 builds of 8.3.4 and 8.4.1 available.

The _demo.tcl_ file illustrates the basic function.

# Known Issues

The reference implementation works on Windows and Linux. A Mac implementation
has been partially implemented. Because of the Mac architecture, it is
necessary to reconstruct widgets in order to remap their window hierarchy.
The reference implementation includes a widget flag, TK\_URBAN\_RENEWAL which is
used to trigger this reconstruction.

Because of assumptions and restrictions, Toplevels can only be managed by the
window manager and cannot become frames and be managed by any other geometry
manager. This restriction is enforced which means the **-use** and
**-screen** options do not present any problem or complication with this
proposal.

The toplevel **-menu** option has been added to frames. This allows the
setting of menus on a frame so that when the frame is managed as a toplevel,
the menus will appear, otherwise the option is ignored.

# Alternatives

An alternative to extending the **wm** command is to make this feature
either a method or a configure option of the Toplevel and Frame widget.

_A._ [_w_ **detach**] to convert a Frame into a Toplevel, and [_w_
attach**] to convert a Toplevel into a Frame.

_B._ [_w_ **configure -toplevel 1**] to convert a Frame into a
Toplevel, and [_w_ **configure -toplevel 0**] to convert a Toplevel into
a Frame.

These different approaches \(wm, method, config\) depend on how the feature is
viewed. One view is that the of changing the nature or class \(Toplevel, Frame\)
of the widget. An alternative view is that of changing "who" manages the
widget \(wm, place, grid, pack\).

I suppose another alternative is to follow the precedent of the geometry
managers:

 * **wm** _w_ ?**-transient** _parent_? ?**-overrideredirect**
   _boolean_? ...

 * **wm forget** _w_

# Comments

_From Sacha Schär <sacha.schaer@unibas.ch>:_

The way the TIP and its alternatives are proposed, a frame can be made into a
toplevel and vice versa. However, it is not possible, to move a frame from one
toplevel to another. This is of importance even for the most common motivation
for this TIP, the possibility to implement a tear-off behaviour. If a frame is
going to be teared out of a toplevel window, it might be desirable that it
becomes part of another toplevel window, together with some extra decoration.

I see, that with this more general behaviour, the path name becomes a problem.
Therefore I propose the alternative approach, of making the **-container**
and **-use** options dynamically configurable as already discussed in the
past

_From Brian:_

The problem is that we can't reparent widgets without changing their Tk widget
pathname. Doing this introduces all kinds of sticky problems.

In practice, the decoration is in the form of Menus, Toolbars, and Footers.
All of these things can \(must\) be created and managed as part of the
dock/undock process. The way to do this is to create these things the first
time a window is undocked, then just "hide" them when redocking the window;
they still exist, but are just not mapped anywhere, until the next time the
window is undocked.

The bottom line is that the **wm manage** command does not do _everything_
you need when performing an undock operation; it is only a small piece of the
pie, but a very critical one.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

