# TIP 129: New Format Codes for the [binary] Command
	Author:         Arjen Markus <arjen.markus@wldelft.nl>
	Author:         Torsten Reincke <reincke@typoscriptics.de>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        14-Mar-2003
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       IEEE,binary data,Tcl
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to add a set of new format codes to the **binary**
command to enhance its ability to deal with especially non-native
floating-point data.  The assumption is that current limitations are
due to the distinction between little-endian and big-endian storage of
such data.

# Introduction

The current **binary** command can manipulate little-endian and
big-endian _integer_ data, but only _native_ floating-point data.
This means that binary data from other computer systems that use a
different representation of floating-point data can not be directly
handled.

The lack of format codes to handle "native" integer data means that
one has to distinguish the current platform's byte ordering to be
platform-independent, whenever the **binary** command is used.

Most current computer systems use either little-endian or big-endian
byte order and the so-called IEEE representation for the exponent and
mantissa.  So, the main variation to deal with is the endian-ness.

Some popular file formats, like ESRI's ArcView shape files, use both
types of byte order.  It is difficult \(though not impossible\) to
handle these files with the current set of format codes.

It should be noted that there _is_ more variety among floating-point
representation than just the byte order.  This TIP will not solve this
more general problem.

# Proposed Format Codes

Format codes should be available to catch the two main varieties of
byte ordering.  There should, both for reasons of symmetry and for
practical purposes, also be a full set to deal with "native" data.

For integer types there are no codes to deal with native ordering. So:

 * **t** \(tiny\) for short integers, using native ordering.

 * **n** \(normal\) for ordinary integers, using native ordering.

 * **m** \(mirror of "w"\) for wide integers, using native ordering.

The floating-point types will be handled via:

 * **r**/**R** \(real\) for single-precision reals.

 * **q**/**Q** \(mirror of "d"\) for double-precision reals.

where the lower-case is associated with little-endian order and the
upper-case with big-endian order.

# Implementation Notes

The implementation for the integer types is simple:

 * The new format codes are synonyms for the current ones, but
   different ones for each endian-ness.

The implementation for the floating-point types is somewhat more
complicated, this involves adding byte swapping, if the ordering of
the platform does not correspond to that of the format code.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain.

