# TIP 131: Read My Mind and Do What I Mean
	Author:		Joe English <jenglish@flightlab.com>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		No voting
	Tcl-Version:	8.5
	Created:	01-Apr-2003
	Post-History:	
-----

# Abstract

A new Tcl command is proposed, _rmmadwim_.  This is an acronym for
\`\`Read My Mind and Do What I Mean_.  This command has obvious
utility.

# Specification

The _rmmadwim_ command shall take no arguments.  When invoked, the
Tcl interpreter shall read the programmer's mind and do what he or she
intends.

_NOTE:_ It is very important that _rmmadwim_ read the
_programmer's_ mind, not the end user's.  Otherwise the consequences
could be disastrous, since end users rarely have a firm grasp of what
the original programmer was up to.

As a consequence of this command, there is also a corresponding
function for _expr_ which applies the same principles to general
mathematical computation:

	  set result [expr {rmmadwim()}]

This extra functionality is easy to enable:

	  rmmadwim

# Rationale

What Tcl needs in order to succeed in the marketplace is a feature
that no other programming language provides, a "killer app" as it
were.  The Tk toolkit, Expect, cross-platform portability, scripted
documents, tkcon, and the [incr Tcl] "toaster" example are all well
and good, but they have clearly failed to push Tcl usage to the point
of having critical mass.  The _rmmadwim_ command would provide a
powerful enough incentive that even Perl programmers would be
compelled to switch languages.

# Reference Implementation

A skeletal implementation is included below.  Clearly some of the
details remain to be flushed out, but this is a simple matter of
programming \(SMOP\).  It should be a fun weekend project for Richard
Suchenwirth.

File: _tcl/generic/tclCmdMZ.c_

Function: _Tcl\_RmmAndDWIMObjCmd_

	       /*ARGSUSED*/
	   int
	   Tcl_RmmAndDWIMObjCmd(dummy, interp, objc, objv)
	       ClientData dummy;                   /* Not used. */
	       Tcl_Interp *interp;                 /* Current interpreter. */
	       int objc;                           /* Number of arguments. */
	       Tcl_Obj *CONST objv[];              /* Argument objects. */
	   {
	       int status;
	       Tcl_Obj *intentions;
	
	       if (objc != 1) {
	           Tcl_WrongNumArgs(interp, 1, objv, NULL);
	           return TCL_ERROR;
	       }
	
	       status = TclReadProgrammersMind(interp, &intentions);
	       if (status != TCL_OK) {
	           return status;
	       }
	
	       status = TclDoWhatIsMeant(interp, intentions);
	       return status;
	   }

# Security Implications

It was pointed out that the ability to read the programmers' mind
carries with it certain security and privacy implementations.

To address this, the following code should be executed whenever a safe
interpreter is created:

	   #
	   # Query the programmer's mind to obtain his or her
	   # P3P settings (See "Platform for Privacy Preferences",
	   # <URL: http://www.w3.org/P3P >)
	   #
	       rmmadwim
	
	   #
	   # Disable any internal commands that are in conflict
	   # with those settings:
	   #
	       rmmadwim

In addition, the Tcl release notes should give a clear indication to
programmers about the new security implications for non-Safe
interpreters.

# Copyright

This TIP is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License; either version 2 of
the License, or \(at Richard Stallman's discretion\), any later version.

Just kidding.  Public domain, as usual.

