# TIP 143: An Interpreter Resource Limiting Framework
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@man.ac.uk>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        25-Jul-2003
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
	Tcl-Ticket:     926771
-----

# Abstract

This TIP introduces a mechanism for creating and manipulating
per-interpreter resource limits.  This stops several significant
classes of denial-of-service attack, and can also be used to do things
like guaranteeing an answer within a particular amount of time.

# Rationale

Currently it is trivial for scripts running in even safe Tcl
interpreters to conduct a denial-of-service attack on the thread in
which they are running.  All they have to do is write a simple
infinite loop with the **for** or **while** commands.  Of course, it
is possible to put a stop to this by hiding those commands from the
interpreter, but even then it is possible to simulate the DoS effect
with the help of a procedure like this \(which even under ideal
conditions will take over three days to run\):

	proc x s {eval $s; eval $s; eval $s; eval $s}
	x {x {x {x {x {x {x {x {x {x {x {x {x {x {sleep 1}}}}}}}}}}}}}}

The easiest way around this, of course, is the resource quota as used
by heavyweight operating systems, perhaps combined with the
_alarm\(2\)_ system call.  Or at least that would be the way to do it
if it wasn't for the fact that those are ridiculously heavy
sledgehammers to take to this particular nut.  Luckily we control the
execution environment - it is a Tcl interpreter after all - so we can
implement our own checks.  It is this that is the aim of this TIP.

## Efficiency

Efficiency of any resource monitoring system is naturally a major
concern; it is relatively simple to create a resource monitoring system
but quite a lot harder to arrange for that monitoring to be cheap enough
that its use does not greatly impact on the general speed of the program
\(in this case, Tcl.\)  The costs of checking time limits in particular
can be somewhat excessive because of the necessity of performing a
system call to carry out the check, but if you're performing any action
a lot, it can get costly.

My strategy for limiting the impact upon performance is to provide a
programmer-tunable per-limit parameter called the granularity.  This
specifies how often \(out of all the locations in the processing of the
Tcl interpreter and bytecode engine\) the limits should be checked; the
granularity is per-limit because there is this distinct difference in
the cost of checking different kinds of limits, and the limits are
tunable because the ideal frequency depends very largely on the code
being limited.  This can be combined with the fact that the test to see
if _any_ limits have been turned on can be made extremely cheap \(i.e.
just a comparison of a memory location to zero\) and it allows unlimited
interpreters to perform at almost the same speed as before.

# A Tcl API for Limit Control

I propose to add a subcommand **limit** to the **interp** command and
to the object-like interpreter access commands.  It will be an error
for any safe interpreter to call the **limit** subcommand; master
interpreters may enable it for their safe slaves via the mechanism
interpreter aliases, as is normal for security policies.

The first argument to the **interp limit** command will be the name of
the interpreter whose limit is to be inspected.  The second argument
will be the name of the limit being modified; this TIP defines two
kinds of limits:

 time: Specifies when the interpreter will be prohibited from
   performing further executions.  The limit is not guaranteed to be
   hit at exactly the time given, but will not be hit before then.

 command: Specifies a maximum number of commands \(see **info
   cmdcount**\) to be executed.

The third and subsequent arguments specify a series of properties
\(each of which has a name that begins with a hyphen\) which may be set
\(if there are pairs of arguments, being the property name and the
value to set it to\) or read \(if there is just the property name on its
own\).  If no properties are listed at all, all dictionary \(see [[111]](111.md)\)
of all properties for the particular limit is returned. The set of
properties is limit-specific, but always includes the following:

 -command: A Tcl script to be executed in the global namespace of the
   interpreter reading/writing the property when the limit is found to
   be exceeded in the limited interpreter.  If no command callback is
   defined _for this interpreter_, the **-command** option will be
   the empty string.  Note that multiple interpreters may set command
   callbacks that are distinct from each other; an interpreter may not
   see what other interpreters have installed \(except by running a
   script in those foreign interpreters, of course.\)  The order of
   calling of the callbacks is not defined by this TIP.

 > Where a callback returns any kind of exceptional condition
   \(i.e. the result isn't TCL\_OK\) a background error is flagged up.

 -granularity: Limits will always be checked in locations where the
   _Tcl\_Async\*\(\)_ API is called, as this is called regularly by the Tcl
   interpreter \(with a few exceptions relating to event loop
   handling.\)  However, the cost of just checking a limit can be
   quite appreciable \(it might involve system calls, say\) so this
   property allows the control of how frequently, out of the
   opportunities to check a limit, are such limits actually checked.
   If the granularity is _1_, the limit will be checked
   every time.  It is an error to try to set the granularity to less
   than _1_.

When an interpreter hits a limit, it first runs all command callbacks
in their respective interpreters.  Once that is done, the interpreter
rechecks the limit \(since the command callbacks might have decided to
raise or remove it\) and if it is still exceeded it bails out the
interpreter in the following way:

 * A flag is set in the interpreter to mark the interpreter as having
   exceeded its limits.

 * The currently executing command/script in the interpreter is made
   to return with code TCL\_ERROR.  \(This is superior to using a novel
   return code, as third-party extensions are usually far better at
   handling error cases!\)

 * The **catch** command will only catch errors if the interpreter
   containing it does not have the flag mentioned just above set.
   Similarly, further trips round the internal loops of the
   **vwait**, **update** and **tkwait** commands will not
   proceed with that flag set.  \(Extensions can find this information
   out by using _Tcl\_LimitExceeded\(\)_; see below.\)  No calls to
   **bgerror** should be made.

 * Once the execution unwinds out of the interpreter so that no
   further invocations of the interpreter are left on the call-stack,
   the flag is reset.  The same is true if the limits are adjusted in
   any way.  Note that attempting to execute things within the
   interpreter without raising the limits will result in the limit
   being hit immediately.

When resource limits are being used, unlimited master interpreters
should take care to use the **catch** command when calling their
limited slaves.  Otherwise hitting the limit in the slave might well
smash the master as well, just because of general error propagation.
But that is good practise anyway.

## Time Limits

Time limits are specified in terms of the time when the limit will be
hit.  Setting the limit to the current time ensures that the limit
will be immediately activated.  Time limits have two options for
specifying the limit.

 -seconds: This sets the absolute time \(in seconds from the epoch, as
   returned by **clock seconds**\) that the time limit is hit.  If
   set to the empty string, the limit is removed.  If no time limit is
   set, this option is empty when inspected.

 -milliseconds: This sets the number of milliseconds after the start
   of the second specified in the **-seconds** option that the time
   limit is hit.  May only be set to the empty string if the
   **-seconds** option is empty and present, and may only be set to
   a numeric value if the **-seconds** option is unspecified or
   present and non-empty \(it is always safe to leave this option
   unspecified.\)  If no time limit is set, this option is empty when
   inspected.

Where a time-limited interpreter creates a slave interpreter, the
slave will get the same time-limit as the creating master interpreter.

## Command Limits

Command limits are specified in terms of the number of commands \(see
**info cmdcount** for a definition of the metric\) that may be
executed before the limit is hit.  Command limits have the following
extra option for specifying and inspecting the limit.

 -value: The number of commands \(integer of course\) that may actually
   be executed.  If set to the empty string, the limit is removed, and
   when introspecting, unlimited interpreters return empty strings for
   this value.

Where a command-limited interpreter creates a slave interpreter, the
slave will get the command-limit _0_ after initialisation
\(i.e. after the return from the call to _Tcl\_CreateSlave\(\)_\) and
will be unable to execute and commands until the limit for the slave
is raised.  Master interpreters implementing security policies for
safe interpreters might want to set such limits semi-automatically to
something more useful by deducting command-executions from the
creating interpreter to its new slave.

# A C-level API for Limit Control

It is also desirable for there to be a general C API for controlling
resource limits.  Not only does this provide control to extension
authors that can't be easily smashed by Tcl scripts by accident, but
it also makes implementation of the Tcl API to the limit subsystem
easier to create as well.

 * int **Tcl\_LimitReady**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_\)

	 > Test whether a limit is ready to be checked according to its
   granularity rules.  Result is boolean.  Note that this is a cheap
   call.

 * int **Tcl\_LimitCheck**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_\)

	 > Test whether a limit has been exceeded.  Result is boolean.  Note
   that this call is potentially expensive \(checking a time limit
   requires a minimum of one system call.\)

 * int **Tcl\_LimitExceeded**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_\)

	 > Test whether the interpreter is in a state where a limit has been
   previously exceeded \(i.e. whether a previous call to
   **Tcl\_LimitCheck** had indicated that a limit had been hit\) and
   not yet reset \(by extending or removing the relevant limit.\)
   Result is boolean.  Note that this is a cheap call.

 * int **Tcl\_LimitTypeEnabled**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, int _type_\)

	 > Test whether the given type of limit is turned on.  Result is boolean.
   Note that this is a cheap call.

 * int **Tcl\_LimitTypeExceeded**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, int _type_\)

	 > Test whether the given type of limit has been hit \(in the notion of
   **Tcl\_LimitExceeded**\) and not yet reset.  Result is boolean.
   Note that this is a cheap call.

 * void **Tcl\_LimitTypeSet**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, int _type_\)

	 > Turn on the given type of limit.

 * void **Tcl\_LimitTypeReset**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, int _type_\)

	 > Turn off the given type of limit.

 * void **Tcl\_LimitAddHandler**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, int _type_,
	Tcl\_LimitHandlerProc \*_handlerProc_, ClientData _clientData_,
	Tcl\_LimitHandlerDeleteProc \*_deleteProc_\)

	 > Add a limit handler for the given type of limit and specify some
   caller context and a scheme for deleting that context.

 * void **Tcl\_LimitRemoveHandler**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, int _type_,
	Tcl\_LimitHandlerProc \*_handlerProc_, ClientData _clientData_\)

	 > Remove a limit handler for the given type of limit.  It is not an
   error to delete a limit that was not set; in that case, nothing is
   changed.

 * void **Tcl\_LimitSetCommands**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_,
	int _commandLimit_\)

	 > Set a limiting value on the number of commands, and reset whether
   the limit has been triggered.  Does not enable the limit.

 * int **Tcl\_LimitGetCommands**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_\)

	 > Get the current limit on the number of commands.

 * void **Tcl\_LimitSetTime**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Time \*_timeLimitPtr_\)

	 > Set a limiting value \(copying it from the buffer pointed to by
   _timeLimitPtr_\) on the latest time that the code may execute, and
   reset whether the limit has been triggered.  Does not enable the
   limit.  The _usec_ field of the buffer should be in the range 0
   to 999999.

 * void **Tcl\_LimitGetTime**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Time \*_timeLimitPtr_\)

	 > Get the current limit on the execution time, writing it into the
   buffer pointed to by _timeLimitPtr_.

 * void **Tcl\_LimitSetGranularity**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, int _type_,
	int _granularity_\)

	 > Set the checking granularity for the given type of limit.

 * int **Tcl\_LimitGetGranularity**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, int _type_\)

	 > Get the checking granularity for the given type of limit.

Above, _type_ is either TCL\_LIMIT\_COMMANDS or TCL\_LIMIT\_TIME,
_handlerProc_ is a pointer to a function that takes two parameters
\(a ClientData and a Tcl\_Interp\*\) and returns void, and _deleteProc_
is a pointer to a function that takes a single parameter \(a
ClientData\) and returns void.  The key is that _handlerProc_s are
called when a limit is hit \(they are used to implement the guts of the
**-command** option\), and when the callback is deleted for any
reason \(including a call to **Tcl\_LimitRemoveHandler** and deleting
the limited interpreter\) the _deleteProc_ is called to release the
resources consumed by the _clientData_ context.

# Use Cases

## WebServices

One use for this sort of code might be in a web-services context where
it is important to return a message to some client code within some
interval.  Using an in-process limiting mechanism allows this to be
implemented in a far more light-weight fashion, as the alternative would
be to fork off a new small application server for each incoming request
and it would be considerably more complex to have a scripted executive
that decides \(possibly by examining the stack\) whether a failure to
deliver an answer within bounds is serious, or whether some extra
resources should be granted to allow execution to run to completion.
Other high-performance server applications would also be likely to gain
from this sort of thing.

## Profiling

It is possible to use the limiting code \(and especially the script
callbacks\) to write a Tcl profiler.  Every time the limit runs out, the
callback can examine the Tcl stack in the limited interpreter and then
assign some more resources to last up until the next profile trap.

## Untrusted Code Execution

As indicated earlier, these limits can be used to increase control over
untrusted code running in safe interpreters.  While it would be
necessary to extend this to memory consumption for every aspect that
could be impacted by some malicious code to be controllable, having
control over the number of commands that may be executed and how long
those commands may take gives a much higher degree of control than
currently exists, and is thus a monotonic improvement.

# Possible Future Directions

There are some obvious other things that could be brought within this
framework, but which I've left out for various reasons:

 call stack: We already do limiting of this, so bring that within this
   framework would be a nice regularisation.  On the other hand, such
   a change would not be backward-compatible, and it might not be safe
   to perform the callbacks either \(especially as overflowing the
   stack is fatal in a way that overrunning on time is not.\)

 memory: Limiting the amount of memory that an interpreter may
   allocate for its own use would be very nice.  But conceptually
   difficult to do \(what about memory shared between interpreters?\),
   expensive to keep track of \(memory debugging is known to add a lot
   of overhead, and memory limiting would be more intrusive\) and a
   really big change technically too \(i.e. you'd be rewriting a
   significant fraction of the Tcl C API to make sure that every
   memory allocation knows which interpreter owns it.\)

 open channels, file sizes, etc.: Most other things can be limited in
   Tcl right now without special support.

# Implementation

An example implementation of this TIP is available as a patch
<http://sf.net/tracker/?func=detail&aid=926771&group_id=10894&atid=310894> .

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain.

