# TIP 151: Remove -e: Command Line Option from tclsh and wish
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sourceforge.net>
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sf.net>
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@man.ac.uk>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        22-Aug-2003
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes removal of the -e: command line option to
tclsh and wish that was Accepted as part of [[137]](137.md).

# Background

[[137]](137.md) was Accepted today.  However, there were a few NO votes
objecting to the new _-e:_ form of the _-encoding_ command
line option for specifying the encoding of a startup script to tclsh
and wish.  Those voting NO only objected to that part of [[137]](137.md)
while supporting the rest as a solid proposal that will improve
Tcl.  Among those voting YES, no one explicitly embraced the
_-e:_ command line option as something they required.  Some
voting YES opined that the _-e:_ option was a wart that
could be fixed later.

Based on those comments, [[137]](137.md) would have been better had the
_-e:_ form of the command line option not been part of the
proposal.  This TIP proposes nothing more than removing
Acceptance of the _-e:_ form of the _-encoding_ command
line option.

Without the controversial _-e:_ proposal, I believe [[137]](137.md)
would have had unanimous approval.

# Rationale

The use of _-e:_ as a command line option to tclsh or wish
suffers when compared with the perl program.  The _perl -e_
option for evaluation of a Perl script provided on the command
line is very well known, and it's a mistake to add something
to tclsh that looks similar, but is in fact very different.

[[137]](137.md) proposed both _-encoding_ and the _-e:_ form.  There's
really no need to add multiple ways to do the same thing.

The Rationale in [[137]](137.md) for the _-e:_ form is solely to support
the 32-character limit in some Unices for their _\#!_ lines.
However, the _-e:_ form does not really solve that problem.
For example:

	 #!/usr/local/bin/tclsh8.5 -e:iso8859-15 
	 12345678901234567890123456789012

Here we see that we still run afoul of the 32-character limit
when tclsh is installed in the default location.  Even longer
encoding names exist which magnify the problem, and altering the
installation location will not necessarily help:

	 #!/usr/bin/tclsh8.5 -e:iso8859-15 
	 12345678901234567890123456789012

\(This is actually an insidious failure mode in that it leads to the
script being sourced with a valid but incorrect encoding.\)

Conversely, we already have an effective general workaround
for the 32-character limit problem:

	 #!/bin/sh
	 # \
	 exec tclsh -encoding iso8859-15 "$0" ${1+"$@"}

So, _-e:_ doesn't solve a problem we don't really have, and
it's controverisal.  We should remove it.

# Proposal

Remove \(Acceptance of\) the _-e:_ set of command line options
to the programs _tclsh_ and _wish_.

# Compatibility

Since no version of Tcl or Tk has been released supporting
the _-e:_ command line option, there are no compatibility
issues to resolve.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain.

