# TIP 166: Reading and Writing the Photo Image Alpha Channel
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@man.ac.uk>
	Author:         Simon Bachmann <simonbachmann@bluewin.ch>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        19-Nov-2003
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tk,image get,image put
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This TIP describes how to update the **image get** and **image put**
subcommands so as to allow script-level access to the full alpha
channel information that has been present in the photo image data
model since Tk 8.3.

# Rationale

Alpha channels.  We've had them in Tk's photo image data model \(which
is currently 8-bits-per-channel RGBA\) for quite some time now.  We can
copy the alpha data around inside the image.  We now display them
correctly on deep-enough displays \(many thanks to the people who have
worked on that!\)  But can we write alpha data into an image?  No.  Not
unless you have an image format handler that produces alpha data
installed \(e.g. the PNG from tkimg.\)  I think we should fix this so
that people can read and write the full alpha data from scripts.

# Proposal

I propose to update the _photoImageInstance_ **get** subcommand so
that it takes an extra option **-withalpha** \(to be placed after the
coordinates\). If that option is specified, the subcommand will return
four values instead of three, with the fourth being the contents of
the alpha channel for the pixel. Without this new option, the
subcommand will return three values as before.

I also propose to update the _photoImageInstance_ **put** subcommand
so that alpha channel information may be specified in the following ways
when using the list-of-lists-of-pixel-data format \(the image-format
format will be up to the particular image format code, as always.\)

 * If a pixel is specified as being the empty string, that pixel will
   be set to be completely transparent.  This parallels the
   interpretation of the empty string as transparency elsewhere within
   the core \(notably in [canvas] items.\)

 * Any standard Tk colour format \(those accepted by
   **Tk\_GetColor\(\)** - e.g.  _bisque2_ or _\#abcdef_\) may have
   the following suffix added - **@A** - where A is a fractional
   alpha value in the range 0.0 to 1.0 \(which values correspond to
   fully transparent and fully opaque respectively.\)

 * Any standard Tk colour format which does not have a **@A** suffix
   may have a **\#XX** suffix, where XX is a pair of hex digits that
   specify an integer alpha value in the range 0 \(fully transparent\)
   to 255 \(fully opaque\).

 * Any standard Tk colour format which does not have a **@A** suffix
   nor a **\#XX** suffix may have a **\#X** suffix, where X is a
   single hex digit that specifies an integer alpha value in the range
   0 \(fully transparent\) to 255 \(fully opaque\).  This is expanded in
   range from 4 bits wide to 8 bits wide by multiplication by 0x11.

 * All pixel colours that have neither of the foregoing suffixes are
   to be interpreted as being fully opaque, which is the current
   situation anyway.

 * An additional pixel format is to be supported, consisting of a Tcl
   list of three or four integers in the range 0 to 255, being the
   value of the red channel, green channel, blue channel and alpha
   channel respectively in that order.  An absent alpha channel is to
   be interpreted as full opacity.

 * Two additional pixel formats are to be supported, consisting of a
   **\#** followed by exactly four or eight hexadecimal digits.  When
   four digits are present, they will be interpreted as containing data
   for the _RGBA_ channels \(in that order\), and each digit will be
   expanded internally to 8-bits wide by multiplication by 0x11.  When
   eight digits are present, they will be interpreted as containing data
   for the _RGBA_ channels \(in that order\) with two digits for each
   channel.

It should also be possible to include alpha information in the data
retrieved with the _photoImageInstance_ **data** subcommand.
For this, I propose to make the list-of-lists-of-pixel-data format a
regular photo image format \(like PNG, GIF, PPM, etc.\) with the name
**default**. This format will have no file read/write capabilities.
As before, the list-of-lists format will be the default choice for
_photoImageInstance_ **data**, and the last one to be tried for
_photoImageInstance_ **put**. The main benefit of this
change is that it will be possible to request the **default**
format explicitly with the **-format** option and - most important -
to pass suboptions to the format handler. 
The **default** image data format shall accept the suboption
**-colorformat** _type_ which specifies the format to be used to
encode the color and alpha data for each pixel. Accepted values shall
be **rgb** for the \#RRGGBB format \(the current format and default
for the suboption\), **rgba** for the \#RRGGBBAA format, and
**list** for the list format with four elements.
This change will have two side effects:

 * The **-data** option to photo images will accept image data in the
   list-of-lists form as well. Currently only data in one of the
   registered file formats is accepted.

 * The underlying implementation will become simpler and cleaner.

Finally, the _photoImageInstance_ **transparency** command's
subcommands will be updated in the following way:

 * The **get** subcommand will be modified to take an extra option,
   **-alpha** \(to be placed after the coordinates\), that modifies the
   result to be the integral alpha value \(in the range 0 to 255\) for the
   specified pixel. Without the option, the result shall continue to be
   a boolean that is true exactly when the pixel is wholly transparent.

 * The **set** subcommand will be modified to take an extra option,
   **-alpha** \(to be placed after the new value\), that modifies the
   interpretation of the new value so that it is the integral
   alpha value to be set for the pixel.  Without the option, the value 
   will be interpreted as a boolean as before.

# Examples

Create a small image with a black border and a partially-transparent
red area in the center.

	image create photo transExample
	transExample put black -to 0 0 10 10
	transExample put red@.5 -to 2 2 8 8

Retrieve the alpha value of a pixel near the middle of the image
created previously.

	set aVal [transExample transparency get 5 5 -alpha]

Create a green box with a simple shadow effect

	image create photo foo
	# Make a simple graduated fill varying in alpha for the shadow
	for {set i 14} {$i>0} {incr i -1} {
	   set i2 [expr {$i+30}]
	   foo put [format black#%x [expr {15-$i}]] -to $i $i $i2 $i2
	}
	# Put a solid green rectangle on top
	foo put #080 -to 0 0 30 30

Retrieve image data with alpha information in the list-of-lists form
and create a new image with it. 

	image create photo bar -file imageWithTransparency.png
	set imageData [bar data -format {default -colorformat rgba}
	
	# Inspect / modify / save data
	
	image create photo baz -data $imageData

# Reference Implementation

Branch tip-166 on fossil.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain.

