# TIP 186: Expose the Type and Modified-State of Widget Options
	Author:         Peter MacDonald <pmacdona@pdqi.com>
	Author:         Peter MacDonald <peter@pdqi.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        16-Apr-2004
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tk
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Implementation-URL: http://pdqi.com/configure.diff.gz
-----

# Abstract

This TIP adds a 6th \(and 7th element\) to each option in the output of
[_path_ **configure**] for Tk widgets, indicating the type and
modified status of each option respectively.

# Rationale

The configure subcommand of Tk widgets provides a powerful method for
introspection of widget state information.  Unfortunately, two
important pieces of information are currently unavailable.  Namely,
the type Tk is expecting for an option and the whether a user has
explicitly assigned a value.

The type field is valuable in automating interfaces for editing the
contents of widgets.

The modified field is useful in changing styles \(such as in
**tk\_setPalette**\) where we update all widgets that are currently
using default values.

# Specification

The configure subcommand for Tk widgets, when invoked with no
arguments, currently dumps out all options as a list with 5 elements
per-option: optName, dbName, dbClass, defValue, optValue.  This TIP
proposes adding up to 2 additional values: **optType** and
**optModified**.

 * A 6th element, **optType**, is a string representation of the
   type field of **Tk\_ConfigSpec** and **Tk\_OptionSpec**.

 * For widgets using the new **Tk\_OptionSpec**, a 7th appended
   element indicates whether an option has been set by the user.

# Notes

Perhaps **optModified** should be specified as an enumeration.  For
example:

  * 1 = **USER\_MODIFIED**

  * 2 = **OPTION\_DATABASE**

  * 3 = **SYSTEM\_DEFAULT**

  * 4 = **TABLE\_DEFAULT**

In addition, as much of the Tk core is still using
**Tk\_ConfigSpec**, would some form of compatibility interface make
sense whereby a **Tk\_ConfigSpec** could be used to dynamically
produce a **Tk\_OptionSpec**?  \(This last is out of the scope of this
TIP.\)

Probably also need a way to change options such that the **USER\_MODIFIED** flag does not get set. \(eg. **tk\_setPalette**\)

# Changes

Threre are a couple of small changes to _tkConfig.c_ and
_tkOldConfig.c_, plus a \#define of **TK\_OPTION\_VALUE\_SET** in
_tk.h_

# Overhead/Impact

Scripts currently exploiting introspection and depending upon a list
length of 5 may break.

# Reference Implementation

There is a simple implementation of the above available as a patch
against Tk 8.4.2<http://pdqi.com/configure.diff.gz> .  It does not
implement a enumerated flag for **optModified**, and the type string
lookup is rather crude.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

