# TIP 191: Managing Tcl Packages and Modules in a Multi-Version Environment
	Author:         Andreas Kupries <akupries@shaw.ca>
	Author:         Joe English <jenglish@users.sourceforge.net>
	Author:         Larry Virden <lvirden@yahoo.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Informative
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        24-Mar-2004
	Post-History:   
-----

# Abstract

This document is an informational adjunct to [[189]](189.md) "Tcl Modules",
describing a number of choices for the management of Tcl Modules in
environments with more than one version of the Tcl core installed.  It
lists these choices and then discusses their relative merits and
problems.

# Background and Motivation

A regular package can perform checks in its "pkgIndex.tcl" file
regarding the environment the package would be loaded into should it
be requested, and make the creation of its "provide script" dependent
on the result.  In other words, it is able to prevent its
registration, making it invisible to the Tcl interpreter in question
if the environment is not right \(for example, if the interpreter is too old a version of Tcl\).

A Tcl module cannot do this as its "provide script" is generated by
the module system.

In a controlled environment, like wrapped applications of any form
this is a complete non-issue as we can assume that only those modules
are installed which are not only required, but needed.

This is no problem either for installations with only one version of
the Tcl core.  It is believed that this is currently the majority of cases.

The change breaks only environments with several coexisting Tcl
installations which share package directories among them and rely
on the index scripts to prevent the registration of packages in
unsuitable interpreters.

Another situation where the change can break things is an environment
with a single version of the interpreter, and the version of that
interpreter is changed, upgraded, or downgraded.  Packages for one
version may not work anymore with the new version, or a different
version of the package has to be selected from among the installed
versions.  This situation can be viewed as having multiple version of Tcl, however over time instead of space.

For the environments with multiple versions of Tcl in space a number
of possible solutions are explained in the next section.

# Choices

All solutions are done outside of the Tcl interpreter, in the
filesystem.

 * Each interpreter has its own part of the filesystem.  Modules
   required in several of them are copied around.  Modules not
   required are not copied.  This is easy.  It requires
   more disk space; however that is cheap.

 * Same as above, but use hard- and/or soft-links instead of copying.
   Modules not eligible somewhere are not linked.

	 > This schema can also be used to maintain a central repository,
   which is just a directory tree containing all module files in their
   proper locations.  Then link the packages which should be visible
   to an interpreter into their respective directory trees.

	 > This makes the creation of test environments with a known set
   of packages very easy as well.

 * Keep the modules in several directory trees as wanted and/or needed
   by sharing requirements and then set the list of search paths used
   by an interpreter to exactly those trees which have the modules
   required/usable by it.

## Changes over Time

Note that the default paths set down in [[189]](189.md) ease the management, as
each Tcl shell will not only have its own space, but also access to
extensions for all minor versions which came before it.  This means
that placing an extension into the directory for the smallest version
of Tcl supporting it will make this extension available to this minor
version and all the versions which come after and share the major
version.  This is the right thing almost all of the time.

Only extensions using internal interfaces will have to be dealt with
separately.

# Questions

# Comments

[ Add comments on the document here ]

According to Don Porter the given solutions will not scale.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

