# TIP 193: Simple Syntax Help System
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Vote:		Pending
	Post-History:	
	Author:		Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@man.ac.uk>
	Created:	29-Apr-2004
	Keywords:	Tcl
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a simple scheme to allow commands to provide basic syntax
help for themselves.  This information would allow for more advanced
processing by programs doing interactive input of Tcl commands \(by providing
a mechanism for them to discover what possible completions of the current
command fragment are available\) and could be processed automatically by the
**interp alias** and **namespace ensemble** mechanisms so that help could be
automatically extended to commands defined through those mechanisms.

# Rationale

Currently, Tcl commands are only partially consistent in how they provide
information about their own syntax; the only way of getting any syntax help is
by providing invalid input to the command, but not all commands have invalid
input sequences \(e.g. **list**\) and nor is there any way of knowing what
those invalid sequences are \(where they do exist\) unless you know the
command beforehand.

Such help would be useful in a number of situations, such as command expansion
in something like tkcon.  It would also provide a mechanism for supplying the
sort of detailed information which the likes of [incr Tcl]'s ensembles can
generate, but which the Tcl ensembles of [[112]](112.md) do not do \(for the
reason that this would produce output significantly different in kind from
existing core commands.\)

Note that I do not want to provide extended help such as might be obtained
from manual pages; this help system is designed to be mechanically queryable
first.

# Proposed Change: Tcl Script Level

There are three main components:

## Data Model

Every command would supply help for itself by providing a callback to generate
the information on demand; there will be a compatability callback installed by
default that states that the command may take any number of unknown arguments.

The result of the callback will be a list of command call descriptions.  Each
description will be itself a list of terms that describe a particular way of
calling the command, with one term per argument.  Each term may in turn be one
of:

 * _Required literal_ - this might be something like a subcommand name.

 * _Optional literal_ - a good example of this are the **then** and **else**
   words in a call to **if**.

 * _Required varying_ \(with name for display to the user\) - a normal
   argument which may be whatever the caller wants it to be, subject to the
   higher level constraints implicit in the name.

 * _Optional varying_ \(with name for display to the user\) - a normal
   optional argument.

 * _All remaining arguments_ - this would be used in the default help outlined
   above, but would also be useful for modelling the _args_ parameter to a
   procedure.

[ToDo: say how these are expressed in C code]

## Information Access

There will be a new subcommand of **info** to provide access to this
information at the Tcl level: **help**.  The first argument to **info help**
will be the name of a command, or, if no such command exists and the argument
is a two- or three-element list, a lambda term; if no further arguments are
supplied, the result will be a multi-line string with one invokation per line;
the invokations will be just the string parts with the literal/varying
information omitted and the optional/required information converted into
surrounding question marks.

Otherwise, the second argument to **info help** will be one of:

**summary**: No further arguments. Returns a brief description of what the
    command does, such as the summary text from the manual page (e.g.,
    "`Increment the value of a variable.`" for **incr**).

> **info help** _cmd_ **summary**

**get**: Two optional arguments; an index into the list of command definition
    lines \(first\) and an index within the line \(second\).  If one index is
    supplied, returns the list of values \(without lit/var or opt/req info\)
    for the indexed line.  If two indexes are supplied, returns the string
    form for the indexed word within the indexed line.  If no indexes are
    supplied, or returns a list of every such value list when no index is
    supplied. (See **Help Definitions** below for the description of which
    lines this is referring to.)

> **info help** _cmd_ **get** ?_lineIndex_? ?_wordIndex_?

**literal**: Two required arguments; an index into the list of help "lines"
    and an index into the list of values for that line.  Returns a boolean
    that is true when the indexed word within the indexed line is a literal.

> **info help** _cmd_ **literal** _lineIndex wordIndex_

**required**: Two required arguments; an index into the list of help "lines"
    and an index into the list of values for that line.  Returns a boolean
    that is true when the indexed word within the indexed line is required.

> **info help** _cmd_ **required** _lineIndex wordIndex_

**all**: No further arguments. Returns the whole of the string registered as
   the help definition for the command.

>   **info help** _cmd_ **all**

There shall be an equivalent for TclOO methods. In that case, because methods
are not commands, instead of **info help**, the subcommand to use will
be **info class help** _class method_ for methods defined by classes, 
and **info object help** _object method_ for methods defined by objects.
Subsequent arguments shall be as for **info help** above. _Overall_ help on a
class or object will be via the basic **info help** as those _are_ commands.

## Information Definition

There will be a new **doc** command. It will take one or two arguments.

If it takes a single argument, and is run inside a procedure, lambda term, or
method, then that argument is a _help definition_ to apply to that procedure,
lambda term or method. When a procedure or method is defined, the creation
process shall minimally parse the provided script and determine if the first
command in it is a single-argument **doc** call; if it is, the help definition
in that argument will be applied during the creation of the procedure/method.
For lambda terms, this parsing will occur when the lambda term is first
interpreted as such by Tcl. (Note that this is the _only_ way of documenting a
lambda.)

The single-argument form otherwise has _no_ effect.

In the two argument form, the first argument shall be the name of a Tcl
command and the second argument shall be the help definition.

There will also be a **doc** definition in the definition set supported by
**oo::define** and **oo::objdefine**, that takes two arguments. The first
argument will be the name of a method (any method, not just one created by
the **method** definition). This is necessary as it will be the only way to
create help definitions for forwarded methods.

## Help Definitions

Help definitions will consist of a string that is potentially multi-line. The
string will be split into paragraphs by visually blank lines (i.e., lines that
are empty after being passed through **string trimright**) and the common
whitespace prefix from all paragraphs shall be stripped.

The first paragraph shall be the summary text.

The lines of the second paragraph shall be the data indexed by the other
**info help** subcommands (**get**, **literal** and **required**); one line
per description. The words of each of the lines of the second paragraph shall
be sequences of non-whitespace characters, rather than Tcl words _per se_. If
a word (other than the initial one, which should be the conventional command
name) starts with `?` and finishes with `?` then it shall be internally
interpreted as optional after the question marks are stripped. If a
non-initial word starts and ends with `=`, it shall be interpreted as literal
after the equals signs are stripped.  If both `?` and `=` are present at each
end, in either order, the word shall be both optional and literal and both
will be stripped. Note that command names are _always_ both required and
literal. If the final word of a line is `...`, it shall be always optional and
not literal.

Subsequent paragraphs are not interpreted by this specification, but will be
provided as part of the information returned by **info help**'s **all**.

# Examples

Help for the **incr** command might be done with:
```
doc incr {
   Increment the value of a variable.
	
      incr varName ?increment?

   The default amount to increment by is 1.
}
```
Then you'd be able to do:
```
puts [info help incr summary]
# ==> Increment the value of a variable.
puts [info help incr get]
# ==> {incr varName increment}
puts [info help incr get 0]
# ==> incr varName increment
puts [info help incr literal 0 0]
# ==> 1
puts [info help incr literal 0 1]
# ==> 0
puts [info help incr required 0 1]
# ==> 1
puts [info help incr required 0 2]
# ==> 0
```

Help for the **if** command might be done with:
```
doc if {
   Execute scripts conditionally.
   
      if expr ?=then=? body
      if expr ?=then=? body1 ?=else=? body2
      if expr1 ?=then=? body1 =elseif= expr2 ?=then=? body2 ...

   Each of the expr arguments is evaluated as an expression in order until one
   evaluates to a true value. Then the corresponding body is evaluated as a
   script.  The words 'then' and 'else' are optional; 'elseif' is required if
   more than one expression.  If an 'else' is present or a final body, and no
   expression evaluates to true, the last body is evaluated instead.
}
```

Defining your own help for a procedure:
```
proc foo {a b {c 123}} {
   doc {
      Do the foo to the bar.

      foo a b ?c?
   }
   # ...
}
```

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
