# TIP 193: Simple Syntax Help System
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Vote:		Pending
	Post-History:	
	Author:		Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@man.ac.uk>
	Created:	29-Apr-2004
	Keywords:	Tcl
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a simple scheme to allow commands to provide basic syntax
help for themselves.  This information would allow for more advanced
processing by programs doing interactive input of Tcl commands \(by providing
a mechanism for them to discover what possible completions of the current
command fragment are available\) and could be processed automatically by the
**interp alias** and **namespace ensemble** mechanisms so that help could be
automatically extended to commands defined through those mechanisms.

# Rationale

Currently, Tcl commands are only partially consistent in how they provide
information about their own syntax; the only way of getting any syntax help is
by providing invalid input to the command, but not all commands have invalid
input sequences \(e.g. **list**\) and nor is there any way of knowing what
those invalid sequences are \(where they do exist\) unless you know the
command beforehand.

Such help would be useful in a number of situations, such as command expansion
in something like tkcon.  It would also provide a mechanism for supplying the
sort of detailed information which the likes of [incr Tcl]'s ensembles can
generate, but which the Tcl ensembles of [[112]](112.md) do not do \(for the
reason that this would produce output significantly different in kind from
existing core commands.\)

Note that I do not want to provide extended help such as might be obtained
from manual pages; this help system is designed to be mechanically queryable
first.

# Proposed Change

There are two main components:

## Data Model

Every command would supply help for itself by providing a callback to generate
the information on demand; there will be a compatability callback installed by
default that states that the command may take any number of unknown arguments.

The result of the callback will be a list of command call descriptions.  Each
description will be itself a list of terms that describe a particular way of
calling the command, with one term per argument.  Each term may in turn be one
of:

 * _Required literal_ - this might be something like a subcommand name.

 * _Optional literal_ - a good example of this are the **then** and **else**
   words in a call to **if**.

 * _Required varying_ \(with name for display to the user\) - a normal
   argument which may be whatever the caller wants it to be, subject to the
   higher level constraints implicit in the name.

 * _Optional varying_ \(with name for display to the user\) - a normal
   optional argument.

 * _All remaining arguments_ - this would be used in the default help outlined
   above, but would also be useful for modelling the _args_ parameter to a
   procedure.

[ToDo: say how these are expressed in C code]

[ToDo: talk about how aliases and ensembles can do help construction]

[ToDo: talk about how such information can be partially derived in procedures]

## Information Access

There will be a new subcommand of **info** to provide access to this
information at the Tcl level: **help**.  The first argument to **info help**
will be the name of a command; if no further arguments are supplied, the
result will be a multi-line string with one invokation per line; the
invokations will be just the string parts with the literal/varying information
omitted and the optional/required information converted into surrounding
question marks.

Otherwise, the second argument to **info help** will be one of:

**summary**: No further arguments. Returns a brief description of what the
    command does, such as the summary text from the manual page (e.g.,
    "Increment the value of a variable" for **incr**).

**get**: Two optional arguments; an index into the list of help "lines"
    \(first\) and an index within the line \(second\).  If one index is
    supplied, returns the list of values \(without lit/var or opt/req info\)
    for the indexed line.  If two indexes are supplied, returns the string
    form for the indexed word within the indexed line.  If no indexes are
    supplied, or returns a list of every such value list when no index is
    supplied.

    **info help** _cmd_ **get** ?_lineIndex_? ?_wordIndex_?

**literal**: Two required arguments; an index into the list of help "lines"
    and an index into the list of values for that line.  Returns a boolean
    that is true when the indexed word within the indexed line is a literal.

    **info help** _cmd_ **literal** _lineIndex wordIndex_

**required**: Two required arguments; an index into the list of help "lines"
    and an index into the list of values for that line.  Returns a boolean
    that is true when the indexed word within the indexed line is required.

    **info required** _cmd_ **literal** _lineIndex wordIndex_

[ToDo: could **info help** be used as a mechanism for procedures to set their
own help up?]

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
