# TIP 198: Image Command XPM Extension
	Author:         R. Timothy Edwards <tim@stravinsky.jhuapl.edu>
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sf.net>
	Author:         Kevin Kenny <kennykb@acm.org>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        12-May-2004
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes an extension to the Tk **image** command to
incorporate color pixmap images based on the XPM format.  The format
is analogous to the **bitmap** option \(_tkImgBmap.c_ in the Tk
source\).

# Rationale

The "XPM" format has become more-or-less a standard, and is a nice
text-readable color alternative to the standard X11 bitmap format.
The runtime library for XPM is available in standard Linux
distributions and elsewhere.  Tk has a number of color **photo**
image formats, but these make various assumptions about rendering.
There is no color alternative to the simple pixel-based bitmap format.

# Specification

This TIP specifies the extension of the **image** command in the
following manner:

 > **image create xpm** _name_ **-file** _xpm\_file_

It would probably be a nice idea to include in-line pixmap
specifications similar to that allowed for bitmaps by the BLT package.
However, at this time, the reference implementation does not include
such an extension.

# Reference Implementation

There is an implementation in the source for
XCircuit<http://xcircuit.ece.jhu.edu/> .  The source file is
"tkPixmap.c".

# Comments

I'd like to see more justification in this proposal
as to why a new image type is needed, rather than
implementing a suitable format for either the existing
bitmap or photo image types.  

In fact, the Img extension already has XPM as a photo
image format.  I'm quite baffled as to the need for a new
image type.  Is this TIP better served by a request to
promote XPM to the core set of supported formats?

_2018-02-21_ This TIP is best considered to be 'abandoned'. The two
queries above had been presented to the original author shortly after
the TIP was introduced, and he never replied either to them or to a
repeat status inquiry by email.  Our process doesn't really
contemplate what to do when no TCT member agrees to sponsor a
TIP. Accordingly, I'm going to exercise a peculiar parliamentary move
and 'sponsor' it with an announced intention to vote NO.  --kbk

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

