# TIP 206: Add an [ftruncate] Command
	Author:         Joe Mistachkin <joe@mistachkin.com>
	State:          Rejected
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        25-Jun-2004
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
	Obsoleted-By:	208
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a new command **ftruncate** for truncating open
files.

# Note

This TIP has been effectively rolled into [[208]](208.md).

# Rationale

In Tcl, there is currently no way to truncate a file while it is open
even though all modern operating systems support such an operation.
The current workaround is to close the file and reopen it.  However,
in cases where the file must be held open \(e.g. on Unix where the file
has already been deleted and is just being used as scratch space\) this
workaround cannot be used.

# Specification

 > **ftruncate** _channelId_ ?_length_?

The channel specified by _channelId_ must refer to a file that was
opened for writing.  The _length_ argument must be greater than or
equal to zero and can be bigger than the current size of the file.  If
the _length_ argument is omitted, the file will be truncated at the current access position.  This command will return any errors received from the operating system.

## Example Usage

	# Open the file for reading and writing...
	set file [open "test.txt" {RDWR}]
	# Write some data to the file...
	puts $file "test data"
	
	# Some time later...
	# ... ... ...
	ftruncate $file
	# ... ... ...
	
	# We are done, close the file...
	close $file

# Proposed C API Changes

A new function named **Tcl\_TruncateChannel** would be added to the
Tcl C API \(taking two arguments, the channel to truncate and the
length \(as a wide integer to facilitate use with large files\) to
truncate it to in bytes\).  The channel API would be modified to add
the new functionality for standard disk file channels and to allow
extension authors to implement it for their custom channel types
through specifying in their _Tcl\_ChannelType_ structure a value for
the new field _truncateProc_ \(of type pointer to
_Tcl\_DriverTruncateProc_, which will be a function with the obvious
type signature\).  Finally, the maximum TCL\_CHANNEL\_VERSION would be
increased to TCL\_CHANNEL\_VERSION\_4 to accommodate this new field.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation does _not_ yet exist.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

