# TIP 212: Temporarily Opening out a Dictionary
	State:		Final
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.5
	Vote:		Done
	Post-History:	
	Author:		Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@man.ac.uk>
	Created:	11-Aug-2004
	Keywords:	tcl, dict, update, script
	Tcl-Ticket:	1008768
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a new subcommand of **dict** that associates
variables with dictionary entries while a Tcl script \(the "body" of
the command\) runs.

# Rationale

The standard set of operations provided by the **dict** command \(see
[[111]](111.md) and [[163]](163.md)\) give a fairly rich set of operations, but there are
always further things that script authors want to do.  Instead of
ever-expanding numbers of subcommands offering tiny variants on
existing operations, this TIP provides a generalized mechanism for
associating variables and dictionary entries for the duration of a
script.  This makes writing arbitrary complex manipulations of
dictionaries much simpler.

# Proposed Change

This TIP proposes two new subcommands to **dict**, **update** and
**with**, with the following syntaxes and semantics.

## The 'dict update' Subcommand

 > **dict update** _dictVarName dictKey varName_ ?_dictKey
   varName_ ...? _bodyScript_

In prose, the first argument is the name of a variable containing a
dictionary that will be updated, the last argument is a script to be
executed with the variables set up and whose effects are expected to
be to update the associated variables, and the other arguments between
those two \(of which there must be an even number, with a minimum of
two\) are a list of dictionary keys and the names of variables with
which to associate those keys.

The semantics of the command are this:

 1. For each dictionary key \(_dictKey_\), the value from the
    dictionary contained in the variable named by _dictVarName_
    which that key maps to will be written to the variable associated
    with that key \(_varName_\).  If the key is not present in the
    dictionary, the variable will be unset.

 2. The script \(_bodyScript_\) is executed.

 3. The dictionary is read out of _dictVarName_ again and, for each
    _dictKey_, the _varName_ variable is consulted and the
    contained value placed in the dictionary \(if _varName_ is unset,
    any existing mapping for _dictKey_ will be removed.\)  Finally,
    the resulting dictionary value is written back to _dictVarName_.

	 >  If the _dictVarName_ variable was unset \(without being set to a
    new value\) or otherwise rendered unreadable during the execution
    of _bodyScript_, the updating of the keys and writing back of
    the resulting dictionary to _dictVarName_ is skipped. Note that
    it is only an unreadable _dictVarName_ that is treated this way;
    it is an error for the variable to contain a value that is not a
    valid dictionary.

Note that _dictVarName_ is read twice \(each time, the value read
must be a valid dictionary or the variable must be unset, which is
interpreted as an empty dictionary\) and \(assuming the second read
succeeds and returns a valid dictionary value\) written once, and that
_no_ traces are set up; _dictVarName_ is completely independent of
the _varName_s during the execution of _bodyScript_.

Also note that step 3 is carried out even if _bodyScript_ completes
with a result code other than TCL\_OK, and that the result code of the
overall command will be
the result code of the script unless TCL\_ERROR was the result of the
write-back stage, which might happen if the variable _dictVarName_
is updated \(during the execution of _bodyScript_\) to contain a
non-dictionary value, or if the variable _dictVarName_ is either
unset or cannot be written to \(which can happen if a write trace
throws an error\); note that this mandates that any errors from the
_bodyScript_ are lost if the write-back phase also throws an error.
If the result code is TCL\_OK, the result string/object will be
whatever the result string/object of _bodyScript_ was.

## The 'dict with' Subcommand

 > **dict with** _dictVarName_ ?_key ..._? _bodyScript_

This is a shorthand version of **dict update** \(named after the
Pascal _with_ keyword\) which maps _all_ of the keys in the
dictionary in the variable _dictVarName_ to variables during the
evaluation of _bodyScript_. Note that it builds a list of all the
keys in the dictionary before _bodyScript_ runs and only those
variables which are created are mapped back at the end; if extra keys
are defined in the dictionary in the variable during the execution of
_bodyScript_, they will be left alone when _bodyScript_ finishes.

The variables will be written to and read from in the natural order of
the keys of the dictionary in the variable _dictVarName_ when the
**dict with** command starts.

When a _key_ \(or several _key_s\) is provided, it describes a path
into a nested set of dictionaries \(much like with **dict set**\)
where the selected leaf indicates a dictionary that is to be opened
out.  When writing back, non-existence of any key on the path is
treated the same as if _dictVarName_ itself didn't exist.

# Examples

A somewhat-less-efficient version of **dict set**:

	 dict update someVar $key local {
	     set local $value
	 }

Sorting a list inside a nested dictionary:

	 dict update someVar OuterKey temp {
	     dict update temp InnerKey temp2 {
	         set temp2 [lsort $temp2]
	     }
	 }

"Renaming" a key:

	 dict update someVar oldKey foo newKey bar {
	     set bar $foo
	     unset foo
	 }

Opening out a nested dictionary:

	 dict update someVar OuterKey temp {
	     dict with temp {
	         # Some script goes in here...
	     }
	 }
	 # Alternative version using a key with 'dict with'...
	 dict with someVar OuterKey {
	     # Some script goes in here...  
	 }

# Reference Implementation

See SF patch 1008768<http://sf.net/tracker/?func=detail&aid=1008768&group_id=10894&atid=310894> .

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

