# TIP 220: Escalate Privileges in VFS Close Callback
	Author:         Colin McCormack <colin@sharedtech.dyndns.org>
	Author:         Andreas Kupries <akupries@shaw.ca>
	Author:         Vince Darley <vincentdarley@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        12-Sep-2004
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Ticket:     1057093
-----

# Abstract

This tip allows the creator and opener of a channel to cast away
privileges and have them restored on close, to permit last-minute
processing.  It is sufficient to resolve a _tclvfs_ bug, minimal,
and safe.

# Abstract

This tip allows the creator and opener of a channel to cast away
privileges and have them restored on close, to permit last-minute
processing.  It is sufficient to resolve a _tclvfs_ bug, minimal,
and safe.

# Rationale

_Tclvfs_ has a bug **[[1004273]](1004273.md)** _Can't read from channel in
close callback_
<http://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?aid=1004273> 
that is due in part to the core channel handler behaviour.

The problem is that the user has requested a read-only or write-only
channel, but the _tclvfs_ close process absolutely requires fuller
access to the channel.

Use case one: A user's write-only channel has to be read by close in
order to be processed.

The second relevant use case: A user's read-only channel has to be
written, i.e. loaded with data, before it is passed to the user.

The first use case can be modelled by the _owner_ of a channel \(in
this case, the _tclvfs_ code\) by opening it with minimal
permissions, handing the channel to a user, then subsequently
re-aquiring full possible channel permissions at the point where the
channel needs to be closed - that is, immediately before the
_tclvfs_ close callback is invoked.

The second use case can be modelled by the _owner_ of a channel \(in
this case, the _tclvfs_ code\) by opening it with maximal
permissions, loading the data, and handing the channel to a user
**after** removing the unwanted permissions from the channel.

# Safety

   * Escalation of privilege is controlled with the Tcl core, and is
     unavailable to extensions except in their role as vfs
     implementations.

   * Privilege is only granted to the entity which opened the channel,
     because only that entity implements the close callback.

   * The creator/opener can't operate with any permissions it could
     not have obtained at creation/opening time, since they are
     granted by the OS and not Tcl.

   * Privilege escalation occurs only at a point immediately before
     the Tcl core is about to completely close the channel, so the
     privileges can't leak.

   * The operation of releasing privileges only restricts the user of
     a channel, it cannot be used to reaquire privileges which are not
     granted by the channel.

# Proposed Changes

Immediately prior to invoking the VFS close callback on a channel,
Tcl core should set channel's permissions to the maximum possible.

Export a new function as part of the public API which allows a user to
remove privileges from channel, but not to add them.

# Details

The signature of the new function is

	 int Tcl_RemoveChannelMode (Tcl_Interp* interp, Tcl_Channel chan, int mode);
	
	 /* Codes for 'mode', already defined, _not_ new */
	
	 #define TCL_READABLE	(1<<1)
	 #define TCL_WRITABLE	(1<<2)

The argument _mode_ determines which privilege to release, and is
set to one of the two specified codes. It is **not** a bitset. It is
not allowed to release all privileges of the channel, as this would
make the channel completely inacessible. Trying to do so will
therefore cause the generation of an error, without changing the
channel. The function will return a regular Tcl result code, either
TCL\_OK, or TCL\_ERROR. If the _interp_ argument is set an error
message will be left in the interp in the error case. If the
_interp_ argument is NULL it will be ignored.

# History

This TIP was originally written to allow C code to modify permissions,
but this makes the permissions system mean nothing, as a channel's
permissions could then be freely modified in an _ad hoc_ manner.
The TIP now specifies a weaker modification that is still powerful
enough to implemenent the desired channel semantics.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation will be provided at SourceForge
<http://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?aid=1057093> .

# Comments

It may be preferable for the new function to be in tclInt.h and therefore in the non-public interfaces \(tclvfs already makes use of tclInt.h anyway\): TclRemoveChannelMode.

_[ Add more comments on the document here ]_

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

