# TIP 224: Add New [array] Subcommands 'incr' and 'value'
	Author:         Peter MacDonald <peter@pdqi.com>
	Author:         Robert Seeger <rseeger00@aol.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        28-Sep-2004
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

The TIP proposes the addition to two new subcommands to the
**array** command: **incr** and **value**.  The **incr_
subcommand would increment an element in an array.  The **value**
subcommand would query, reference, and/or initialize an array element.

# Rationale

[[215]](215.md) proposed modifying the **incr** command to auto-initialize
variables which do not exist, rather than throwing an error.  After
some debate, it was identified that frequency counting in arrays was
the primary area of interest.  In particular, the excessive use of
_if/info exists_ constructs in such code is inefficient, verbose and
rather difficult to read.  The addition of these two subcommands could
substantially reduce the complexity of much Tcl code.

# Specification

Two new subcommands will be added to **array**, being **incr** and
**value**.
Both commands take an array name and an elem parameter, but, no string match is performed on elem.

## array incr

 > **array incr** _var elem_ ?_value_? ?_init_?

The **array incr** subcommand would increment _var_\(_elem_\), if
it exists, by _value_, otherwise, initializes it to _init_.  The
default for _value_ is 1, and the default for _init_ is 0.  The
subcommand will return the new value and will support both integer and
double values \(based on the rules for addition in **expr**\).

## array value

 > **array value** _var elem_ ?_value_? ?_init_?

The **array value** would just return the current contents of
_var_\(_elem_\) if it exists, or _value_ otherwise.   If the
_init_ parameter resolves to true \(as determined by
_Tcl\_GetBooleanFromObj\(\)_ of course\), the variable is initialized to
_value_ if it doesn't already exist.  The default for _value_ is
the empty string, and the default for _init_ is false.

# Reference Implementation

Following is a Tcl only implementation of the **incr**/**value**
subcommands:

	proc Array {cmd var elem {amt {}} {init 0}} {
	   # Implement the Array subcmds incr and value on var(elem):
	   #  - incr   increment a variable by amt or initialize
	   #           to init if undefined.
	   #  - value  return the value if defined, else return amt
	   #           initializing if init.
	   upvar $var uvar
	   if {[string match $cmd* incr]} {
	      if {$amt == {}} { set amt 1 }
	      if {[info exists uvar($elem)]} {
	         return [set uvar($elem) [expr {$uvar($elem)+$amt}]]
	      }
	      return [set uvar($elem) $init]
	   } elseif {[string match $cmd* value]} {
	      if {[info exists uvar($elem)]} {
	         return $uvar($elem)
	      }
	      if {$init} {
	         return [set uvar($elem) $amt]
	      }
	      return $amt
	   } else {
	      error "usage: Array incr|value var elem ?amt? ?init?"
	   }
	}

# Discussion

 * Wangnic notes:

	 > **array value** _var elem_ **"" false** can be written as
   **array get** _var elem_

	 > Array get returns name/value pairs.  Array value returns just the
   value.  Also if elem has a \* in it, there may be multiple matches.

 * Hobbs notes:

	 > [[200]](200.md) already rejected _array values_

	 > A single item is returned from _array value_, not a list, as
   there is no string match on elem.

	 > The problem domain is not list processing \(which is expected to be
   relatively expensive\), but rather frequency counting and set
   matching.

 * RHSeeger notes:

	 > It would seem more consistant to push for the _incr_ command to
   include a way to initialize a variable if it doesn't exist \(as per
   [[215]](215.md) or the discussed options contained therein\), rather than add
   an incr subcommand to array.

	 > Being a fan or reintroducing the _array values_ TIP \(since the
   core mailing list indicates it was never fully rejected\), I think
   _array value_ might be a bit confusing, being only off by the
   lack of plurality. \(I was one of the people pushing for [[200]](200.md)
   though, so take that aspect with a grain of salt\)

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

