# TIP 226: Interface to Save and Restore Interpreter State
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sf.net>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        30-Oct-2004
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes new public C routines to allow the dynamic state
of an interp, including the return options, and error logging in progress
as well as the interp result, to be saved and later restored.

# Background

The Tcl C library has long recognized the need for some routines
to be able to make use of a _Tcl\_Interp_ without leaving any
lasting footprints behind, and without interfering with whatever
operations that _Tcl\_Interp_ might be in the midst of performing.
The longstanding routines used to address this need have been
_Tcl\_SaveResult_, _Tcl\_RestoreResult_, and _Tcl\_DiscardResult_.

These existing routines also have known limitations.  The documentation
warns that they should not be used when an error is in progress,
because they are not able to preserve the extra error information
in the _Tcl\_Interp_, only the result.

The existing routines are also showing their age.  Because they
focus on the result of the _Tcl\_Interp_, and because they date
from at least the Tcl 7 days, they spend an inordinate amount
of effort tending to the needs of the long-deprecated
_interp->result_ field.  Also, they make use of the transparent
definition of a public struct, _Tcl\_SavedResult_, and expect
the caller to allocate such structs itself, a practice now frowned
upon, and replaced with the use of opaque structs.

The Itcl extension has long worked around the limitations of
_Tcl\_SaveResult_, etc. by defining its own set of routines
that more completely save and restore the state of a _Tcl\_Interp_.
These routines are _Itcl\_SaveInterpState_, _Itcl\_RestoreInterpState_,
and _Itcl\_DiscardInterpState_.  These routines are able to handle the
case of an error in progress, and have an interface making use of
an opaque struct, _Itcl\_InterpState_.  In order to create these
routines, however, the Itcl extension makes direct access to some of
the private fields of Tcl's _Interp_ struct.

In Tcl 8.5, the proposal of [[90]](90.md) have already extended further
the values that make up the state of a _Tcl\_Interp_, including
a return level, and a dictionary of return options.  Also, some
of the internal fields of the _Interp_ struct have been reworked,
so that the Itcl routines no longer function without modification.

It it time for Tcl to provide public interfaces that perform
the functions of the _Itcl\_\*InterpState_ routines, and in fact,
Tcl should provide exactly those routines.

# Proposal

Three new routines will be added to Tcl's public stub table:

 > Tcl\_InterpState **Tcl\_SaveInterpState**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, int _status_\)

 > int **Tcl\_RestoreInterpState**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_InterpState _state_\)

 > void **Tcl\_DiscardInterpState**\(Tcl\_InterpState _state_\)

Also an opaque struct will be declared in **tcl.h**:

 > typedef struct Tcl\_InterpState\_ \***Tcl\_InterpState**;

These routines are to have the same function as their existing
Itcl counterparts.

These declarations and routines already exist in the HEAD
of Tcl's development sources, but as private routines.  The Tcl
source code itself has already had an upgrade to replace all 
uses of the old _Tcl\_SaveResult_ calls with these new routines.
This TIP merely proposes making these routines available as
part of the public interface.

# Compatibility

Strictly speaking, there are no compatibility issues, since these
are new additions to the public interface.

Callers of the _Tcl\_SaveResult_ family of routines should be
encouraged to update to use the new routines, as they perform
the same function and more.  The _Tcl\_SaveResult_ family of
routines should be kept in the public interface at least through
the Tcl 8 series of releases, though.  Consideration of their
removal for Tcl 9 is left for another proposal.

Itcl will have compatibility issues with Tcl 8.5 because of
the changes to the internal fields of Tcl's _Interp_ struct.
Itcl should make use of these new routines as the implementation
of its corresponding routines whenever compiling against a
Tcl 8.5 set of headers.  When doing that, of course, version 8.5
of the Tcl stubs table will need to be required.

# Reference Implementation

See Tcl Patch 1060579.

# Comments

Please make any comments here.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

