# TIP 227: Interface to Get and Set the Return Options of an Interpreter
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sf.net>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        30-Oct-2004
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
	Tcl-Ticket:     1060579
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes new public C routines to allow the same access to
interpreter return options [[90]](90.md) as are provided at the script level
by the **catch** and **return** commands.

# Background

In Tcl 8.5, the **return** command has aready been extended to
accept all option value pairs passed to it as arguments, to permit
extensions to augment any custom return code values with whatever
additional data values are appropriate.  The **errorInfo** and
**errorCode** values associated with the **TCL\_ERROR** return
code are already converted to this mechanism.

The ability to set custom return options in the interp has been
limited to the script level though.  For extension commands
implemented entirely in C, it is inconvenient and somewhat
unreliable to perform a _Tcl\_Eval\("return ..."\)_ to be able
to access this capability.

Likewise, the **catch** command is able to capture the
current set of return options in the interp, but doing so
requires both a script level command, and use of a variable.
Extension commands implemented in C are better served with
a direct interface to fetch the dictionary value.

# Proposal

Two new routines will be added to Tcl's public stub table:

 > int **Tcl\_SetReturnOptions**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Obj \*_options_\)

 > Tcl\_Obj \***Tcl\_GetReturnOptions**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, int _result_\)

These routines already exist in the HEAD of Tcl's development sources,
but as private routines.  The Tcl source code itself already makes calls
to these routines where appropriate, and their functioning is tested by
the test suite.  This TIP merely proposes making these routines available
as part of the public interface.

The _Tcl\_SetReturnOptions_ routine is essentially equivalent to
the **return -options** command.  The _int_ value returned is
the return code that the **return** command would return given
the same options.  In fact, a valid implementation for the **return**
command would be:

	 int Tcl_ReturnObjCmd(ClientData cd, Tcl_Interp *interp,
				int objc, Tcl_Obj *const objv[])
	 {
	     int explicitResult = (0 == (objc %2));
	     int numOptions = objc - 1 - explicitResult;
	     if (explicitResult) Tcl_SetObjResult(interp, objv[objc-1]);
	     return Tcl_SetReturnOptions(interp, Tcl_NewListObj(numOptions, objv+1));
	 }

Note that _Tcl\_SetReturnOptions_ is like _Tcl\_SetObjResult_
and _Tcl\_SetVar2Ex_ in that you can pass it a newly created
Tcl\_Obj confident that it will be freed later.  No refCount
manipulation is required.

The _Tcl\_GetReturnOptions_ routine is used by **catch** to
fetch the value to be stored in the _optionsVarName_ variable,
if any.  The _result_ argument should be whatever return code
was returned by the script evaluation, or other _interp_ activity
whose return options you wish to retrieve.

The _\(Tcl\_Obj \*\)_ returned by _Tcl\_GetReturnOptions_ points
to a newly created, unshared **Tcl\_Obj**.  It can be written
to as returned; no need to implement copy-on-write checks.  In
particular, new key value pairs can be added to the dictionary,
or existing ones changed or removed.  As noted above, such a
value is also suitable for passing right back to _Tcl\_SetReturnOptions_.

# Compatibility

Some extensions provide commands that offer the ability to evaluate a
Tcl script in some other context, and return the complete result of
that evaluation.  For example, the **Thread** package provides
the **thread::send** command that evaluates a script in another
interp in a different thread.  The **thread::send** command
ultimately has a return code and a result that matches those produced
by the script evaluation in the other thread.  Furthermore, the
**::errorInfo** and **::errorCode** variables are set according
to the script evaluation outcome in the other thread as well.
Extensions that accomplish such passing of full evaluation results
achieve it now with copies of all portions of the full evaluation results:
the return code, the interp result, and when appropriate, the values
of **::errorInfo** and **::errorCode**.  

Such mechanisms will continue to work unchanged in Tcl 8.5.
However, they will no longer represent the _complete_ evaluation
results of the script.  In order to continue to communicate back
the full outcome of script evaluation, these extensions will want
to call _Tcl\_GetReturnOptions_ after the script completes,
transport that value back, and call _Tcl\_SetReturnOptions_
in the original interp.  Note that use of
these routines will automatically take care of **::errorInfo**
and **::errorCode**, so the complete outcome of script evaluation
will be able to be communicated by the return code, the interp result,
and the dictionary of return options.  Because the return options
dictionary is itself extensible, this interface will not need to
change again.

# Reference Implementation

See Tcl Patch 1060579.

# Comments

Please make any comments here.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

