# TIP 233: Virtualization of Tcl's Sense of Time
	Author:         Andreas Kupries <andreas_kupries@users.sf.net>
	Author:         Andreas Kupries <akupries@shaw.ca>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        30-Nov-2004
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
	Tcl-Ticket:     1073863
-----

# Abstract

This document describes a number of changes to internal and public
APIs which allows external code to hook into the routines through
which the Tcl core computes time-dependent information, and to
override them. Through this the external code can manipulate Tcl's
sense of time.

# Background and Motivation

The purpose of this change is to allow code embedding the Tcl core,
like simulators of all kind, to manipulate Tcl's sense of
time. Currently everything in the core dependent on time, like event
handling and all clock operations will always operate in real-time, as
the core gets the basic information directly from the operating
system. At least in simulators however it can make sense to have Tcl
run in the virtual time, and not real-time. This is currently not
possible, and this TIP proposes to change this, and how.

# Specification

At the Tcl level nothing changes. All changes are at the C level,
extending and changing existing APIs.

Two new functions, **Tcl\_SetTimeProc** and **Tcl\_QueryTimeProc**,
are added to the public API of the core. Their signatures are:

	 void Tcl_SetTimeProc(Tcl_GetTimeProc *getProc,
	                      Tcl_ScaleTimeProc *scaleProc,
	                      ClientData clientData);
	
	 void Tcl_QueryTimeProc(Tcl_GetTimeProc **getProc,
	                        Tcl_ScaleTimeProc **scaleProc,
	                        ClientData *clientData);
	
	 typedef void (Tcl_GetTimeProc)   (Tcl_Time *timebuf, ClientData clientData);
	 typedef void (Tcl_ScaleTimeProc) (Tcl_Time *timebuf, ClientData clientData);

The first function registers two related handler functions with the
core. The first handler function is a replacement for
**Tcl\_GetTime**, or rather the OS access made by
**Tcl\_GetTime**. The other handler function is used by the Tcl
notifier to convert wait/block times from virtual into real time.

The second function returns the currently registered handler
functions. If no external handlers were set then this will return the
handlers accessing and processing the native time of the OS.

Any handler pair specified has to return data which is consistent
between them. In other words, setting one handler of the pair to
something assuming a 10-times slowdown, and the other handler of the
pair to something assuming a two-times slowdown is wrong and not
allowed.

The set handlers are allowed to run the delivered time backwards,
however this should be avoided. We have to allow it as the native time
can run backwards as the user can fiddle with the system time one way
or other. Note that the insertion of the hooks will not change the
behaviour of the Tcl core with regard to this situation, i.e. the
existing behaviour is retained.

The implementations of **Tcl\_GetTime** and **TclpGetClicks** are
changed to check for the presence of a handler first, and will ask the
operating system for the current time if and only if no handler has
been registered. Both use the handler _Tcl\_GetTimeProc_.

The implementations of **Tcl\_Sleep**, **Tcl\_WaitForEvent** and
**NotifierThreadProc** are changed to check for the presence of a
handler as well, and will invoke it with the current wait/block time
if it is present. The handler is not invoked if it is either not
present, or if no timeout was specified, or if the timeout is
zero. Both use the handler _Tcl\_ScaleTimeProc_.

# Limitations

While the proposed changes are able to change Tcl's view of the
current time, and of time intervals, no effort was made to reduce the
execution speed of the interpreter itself, i,.e. of the bytecode
engine.

This means that from the point of view of the virtual time the
execution of bytecode has become faster. This can change the relative
timing of events. For example the window for a race condition is in
virtual time effectively reduced in size by the scaling factor between
virtual and real time, becoming less likely.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is provided at SourceForge
<http://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?aid=1073863> .

# Comments

[ Add comments on the document here ]

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

