# TIP 235: Exposing a C API for Ensembles
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        10-Dec-2004
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
-----

# Abstract

This TIP exposes a C API for the ensembles of [[112]](112.md).

# Rationale

As the Tcl core moves to make more use of ensembles, it becomes more
necessary for there to be an API available to allow control over those
ensembles from the C level so that it is not necessary for such
manipulation to be done through the evaluation of Tcl scripts
\(e.g. because this interferes with the interpreter's command count and
that may be limited in that particular interpreter\). Given such an
API, it should be exposed to code outside the Tcl core if at all
possible.

# Proposed Change

This TIP proposes exposing the following functions:

 Tcl\_CreateEnsemble: Create an ensemble linked to a particular
   namespace and return the command token for the namespace command.
   The _flags_ argument specifies the initial version of the set of
   flags controllable through Tcl\_SetEnsembleFlags \(see below\).

 > > Tcl\_Command **Tcl\_CreateEnsemble**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, const char \*_name_, Tcl\_Namespace \*_namespacePtr_, int _flags_\)

 Tcl\_FindEnsemble: Return a command token for an ensemble, or NULL if
   the name does not refer to an ensemble. The _flags_ argument
   controls whether failure to find an ensemble is an error and should
   be either 0 or TCL\_LEAVE\_ERR\_MSG.

 > > Tcl\_Command **Tcl\_FindEnsemble**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Obj \*_cmdNameObj_, int _flags_\)

 Tcl\_IsEnsemble: Test whether a command token refers to an ensemble.

 > > int **Tcl\_IsEnsemble**\(Tcl\_Command _command_\)

 Tcl\_GetEnsembleSubcommandList, Tcl\_SetEnsembleSubcommandList: Read
   and write the \(fixed\) list of subcommands of the ensemble.
   Equivalent to manipulating the **-subcommands** option.

 > > int **Tcl\_GetEnsembleSubcommandList**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Command _command_, Tcl\_Obj \*\*_subcmdListObjPtr_\)

 > > int **Tcl\_SetEnsembleSubcommandList**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Command _command_, Tcl\_Obj \*_subcmdListObj_\)

 Tcl\_GetEnsembleMappingDict, Tcl\_SetEnsembleMappingDict: Read and
   write the dictionary that maps subcommands to prefixes of
   implementation commands. Equivalent to manipulating the **-map**
   option.

 > > int **Tcl\_GetEnsembleMappingDict**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Command _command_, Tcl\_Obj \*\*_mapDictObjPtr_\)

 > > int **Tcl\_SetEnsembleMappingDict**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Command _command_, Tcl\_Obj \*_mapDictObj_\)

 Tcl\_GetEnsembleUnknownHandler, Tcl\_SetEnsembleUnknownHandler: Read
   and write the command prefix list that is used to implement the
   unknown-subcommand handler. Equivalent to manipulating the
   **-unknown** option.

 > > int **Tcl\_GetEnsembleUnknownHandler**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Command _command_, Tcl\_Obj \*\*_handlerListObjPtr_\)

 > > int **Tcl\_SetEnsembleUnknownHandler**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Command _command_, Tcl\_Obj \*_handlerListObj_\)

 Tcl\_GetEnsembleFlags, Tcl\_SetEnsembleFlags: Read and write the flags
   for the ensemble. Currently there is only one settable flag bit,
   TCL\_ENSEMBLE\_PREFIX, which is present exactly when **-prefix**
   option is true.

 > > int **Tcl\_GetEnsembleFlags**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Command _command_, int \*_flagsPtr_\)

 > > int **Tcl\_SetEnsembleFlags**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Command _command_, int _flags_\)

 Tcl\_GetEnsembleNamespace: Reads the namespace associated with the
   ensemble; this value may not be altered.

 > > int **Tcl\_GetEnsembleNamespace**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Command _command_, Tcl\_Namespace \*\*_namespacePtrPtr_\)

## Notes

The handle for an ensemble is a normal Tcl\_Command handle, and any
operation valid on such a command \(e.g. deleting it or finding its name\) 
is valid. Ensembles are just a special subclass of commands. This allows
the ensemble API to be considerably sparser than it would otherwise have
to be.

# Reference Implementation

The API is already in the core, but with internal naming and not
exposed to anyone. Exposure is just renaming a few functions and
putting them in the stubs table. No new types are exposed. All this
means that a reference implementation is truly trivial.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

