# TIP 237: Arbitrary-Precision Integers for Tcl
	Author:         Kevin B. Kenny <kennykb@acm.org>
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sf.net>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        14-Jan-2005
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
	Tcl-Branch:     kennykb-numerics-branch
-----

# Abstract

This TIP adds the capability to perform computations on integer values
of arbitrary precision.

# Rationale

There have been a number of issues in Tcl 8.4 dealing with the limited
range of native integers and wide values. The original ideas of [[72]](72.md),
while they have given at least the basics of 64-bit integer support,
have also introduced some subtle violations of the doctrine that
"everything is a string." Some of these have been insidious bugs -
<http://sf.net/tracker/?func=detail&aid=868489&group_id=10894&atid=110894> 
and
<http://sf.net/tracker/?func=detail&aid=1006626&group_id=10894&atid=110894> 
are illustrative - while others are perhaps not "bugs" in the
strictest sense, but are still surprising behaviour.

For instance, it is possible for a script to tell integers from wide
integers even when their string representations are equal, by
performing any arithmetic operation that overflows:

	    % set x 2147483647    % set x [expr { wide(2146483647) }]
	    2147483647            2147483647
	    % incr x              % incr x
	    -2147483648           2147483648

With things as they stand,
<http://sf.net/tracker/?func=detail&aid=1006626&group_id=10894&atid=110894> 
is nearly unfixable. It causes misconversion of large floating point
numbers that look like integers:

	    % set x -9223372036854775809
	    -9223372036854775809
	    % expr {double($x)}
	    9.22337203685e+018
	    % scan $x %g
	    -9.22337203685e+018

The reason here is that the string of digits is first converted to a
64-bit unsigned integer \(**Tcl\_WideUInt**\). The '-' sign causes the
unsigned integer to be interpreted as a signed integer, and the sign
reversed. Since interpreting the unsigned integer as signed yields an
overflow, the result is positive rather than negative and gives the
odd behaviour shown above.

Of course, even if the implementation of 64-bit arithmetic were bug
free, there would be uses for arithmetic of higher precision. One
example is that several Tcl users have attempted pure-Tcl
implementations of RSA and Diffie-Hellman cryptographic algorithms.
These algorithms depend on arithmetic of high precision; implementing
them efficiently in today's Tcl requires a C extension because the
high-precision algorithms implemented in Tcl are simply too slow to be
acceptable.

Finally, studying the references for accurate conversion of floating
point numbers [[132]](132.md) reveals that input and output conversions both
require arbitrary-precision arithmetic in their implementation. The
reference implementation supplied with that TIP, alas, is code that is
poorly commented and difficult to integrate into Tcl's build system.
Reimplementing it according to Tcl's engineering practices means
implementing a large part of an arbitrary-precision arithmetic
library.

# Proposal

This TIP proposes augmenting Tcl with code for processing integers of
arbitrary precision. Specifically:

 1. The _libtommath_ library <http://math.libtomcrypt.com/>  shall be
    added in a subdirectory of the Tcl source tree, parallel to
    _generic/_, _compat/_, etc. This library implements arithmetic
    on integers of arbitrary precision. For the rationale behind this
    library, and some of the precise integration details, see "Choice
    of Libary" below.

 2. New functions, _Tcl\_NewBignumObj_, _Tcl\_SetBignumObj_,
    _Tcl\_GetBignumFromObj_ and _Tcl\_GetBignumAndClearObj_ shall be
    added to the Tcl library. They shall be specified as follows:

	 > Tcl\_NewBignumObj: Creates an object containing an integer of
      arbitrary precision. The _value_ argument gives the integer in
      the format native to _libtommath_. _Upon return, the value
      argument is cleared, because its digit array has had its
      ownership transferred to the Tcl library._

	 > > Tcl\_Obj \***Tcl\_NewBignumObj**\(mp\_int \*_value_\)

	 > Tcl\_SetBignumObj: Changes the value of an object to an integer of
      arbitrary precision. The _value_ argument gives the integer in
      the format native to _libtommath_. As with other
      **Tcl\_SetFooObj** routines, the **Tcl\_Obj** having its value
      set must be unshared \(copy on write\). As with
      **Tcl\_NewBignumObj**, the _value_ argument is cleared on
      return and the digit list is owned by Tcl thereafter.

	 > > void **Tcl\_SetBignumObj**\(Tcl\_Obj \*_objPtr_, mp\_int \*_value_\)

	 > Tcl\_GetBignumFromObj: Interprets an object as a large integer, and
    constructs a copy of that large integer in the _value_ argument.
    Returns _TCL\_OK_ if successful. On failure, stores an error
    message in the result of _interp_ and returns _TCL\_ERROR_.

	 > > int **Tcl\_GetBignumFromObj**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Obj\*_objPtr_, mp\_int \*_value_\)

	 > Tcl\_GetBignumAndClearObj: Interprets an object as a large integer,
      and stores the large integer in the _value_ argument. Returns
      _TCL\_OK_ if successful. On failure, stores an error message in
      the result of _interp_ and returns _TCL\_ERROR_. Calls
      **Tcl\_Panic** if the object is shared. The object is reset to
      the empty state prior to return from this call.

	 > > int **Tcl\_GetBignumAndClearObj**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Obj\*_objPtr_, mp\_int \*_value_\)

	 >  The memory management of these routines deserves some
    explanation. For performance, it is desirable that copying bignums
    be avoided as far as possible. For this reason, the digit array
    stored in the _mp\_int_ object will be stored by pointer in the
    Tcl internal representation. This will result in memory problems
    unless the _mp\_int_ appears to be destroyed after it has been
    placed in a Tcl object, since further calls to the _libtommath_
    functions may reallocate the array.

	 >  Similarly, when retrieving a large integer from an object, if the
    object retains an internal representation with the _mp\_int_, the
    _mp\_int_ must be copied. Code that intends to overwrite or
    destroy an unshared object immediately can avoid the copy by using
    the call that clears the object; this call returns the original
    _mp\_int_ without needing to do any memory management.

 3. The _internalRep_ union in the _Tcl\_Obj_ structure shall be
    augmented with a _ptrAndLongRep_ field. This field shall be a
    structure comprising a pointer and a long integer. The pointer
    will designate an array of digits \(the _dp_ member of an
    _mp\_int_ structure in _libtommath_\). The long integer will be
    an encoding comprising:

	 > \* one bit representing the sign of the number

	 > \* fifteen bits giving the size of allocated memory in the digit
     array.

	 > \* fifteen bits giving the size of used memory in the digit array.

	 >  The reason for this tight encoding is that the size of a
    _Tcl\_Obj_ shall not change, and yet an _mp\_int_ structure can
    be stored in the internal representation. This encoding will allow
    packing and unpacking the object with a few Boolean operations and
    shifts rather than needing to use a pointer internal
    representation and dynamically allocated memory to store the
    _mp\_int_. This packed representation is adequate to represent
    integers of \(2\*\*15 - 1\) _mp\_digit_s \(or 917,476 bits, since
    libtommath does its arithmetic in base 2\*\*28\). Since cryptographic
    algorithms, floating point conversions, and most number theoretic
    work will not exceed this length, the packed representation should
    cover nearly all values used in practice.

	 >  When an _mp\_int_ value too large for that tight packing is to be
    stored as the internal rep of a _Tcl\_Obj_, a copy of the
    _mp\_int_ value will be allocated from the heap, and a pointer to
    the copy stored in the pointer field. A value of **-1** in the
    long integer field will indicate this unpacked storage option.

 4. A new _tclBignumType_ \(with type name **bignum**\) shall be
    added to the internal set of object types; it will have the
    _ptrAndLongRep_ internal representation, and the usual four
    conversion routines.

 5. The _wideIntRep_ field in the _internalRep_ union shall remain
    \(lest there be extensions that use it\), but all code in the Tcl
    library that deals with it shall be removed. The routines,
    _Tcl\_GetWideIntFromObj_, _Tcl\_SetWideIntObj_, and
    _Tcl\_NewWideIntObj_ shall remain as part of the API, but will
    create objects with either _int_ or _bignum_ internal
    representations.

 6. The **expr** command shall be reworked so that all integer
    arithmetic is performed _as if_ all integers are of arbitrary
    precision. In practice, numbers between LONG\_MIN and LONG\_MAX
    shall be stored in native long integers. The operators shall
    perform type promotions as needed. The command shall avoid \(as far
    as practicable\) performing arbitrary-precision arithmetic when
    native long ints are presented. Specifically:

	 > \* Mixed mode arithmetic with floating point numbers shall work as
     it does today; the argument that is not a floating point number
     shall be converted. Note that it will be possible for conversion
     to overflow the floating-point arithmetic range; in this case,
     the value shall be replaced with _Inf_.

	 > For arithmetic involving only integers:

	 > \* The unary '-' operator shall promote LONG\_MIN to a mp\_int; this is
     the only input that can cause it to overflow.

	 > \* The unary '\+' and '!' operators require no promotion; '\+' does
     nothing but verify that its argument is numeric, and '!' simply
     tests whether its argument is zero.

	 > \* The binary '\*\*' operator \(and the _pow_ function\) shall promote
     to an arbitrary precision integer conservatively: when computing
     'a\*\*b', it will precompute 'ceil\(log2\(a\)\*b\)', and promote if this
     logarithm exceeds LONG\_BITS-1. The result shall be demoted to an
     integer if it fits.

	 > \* The binary '\*' operator, if either argument is an
     arbitary-precision integer, shall promote the other to an
     arbitrary-precision integer. If both are native integers, and
     _Tcl\_WideInt_ is at least twice the width of a native _long_,
     then the product will be computed in a _Tcl\_WideInt_, and the
     result will be either demoted to a _long_ \(if it fits\) or
     promoted to an _mp\_int_.

	 > > In the case where _Tcl\_WideInt_ is not at least twice the width
     of _long_, the product will be computed to arbitrary precision
     and then demoted if it fits in a _long_. _This case is the
     only identified place where arbitrary-precision arithmetic will
     be used on native integers._

	 > \* The binary '/' operator, if either argument is an
     arbitrary-precision integer, shall promote the other. If the
     quotient fits in a _long_, it shall be demoted.

	 > \* The binary '%' operator, in computing _a%b_, shall do the
     following:

	 > > \* If _a_ and _b_ are both native long integers, the result is
       also a native long integer.

	 > > \* If _a_ is a native long integer but _b_ is an
       arbitrary-precision integer, then _a<b_, and _a%b_ can be
       computed without division.

	 > > \* If _b_ is a native _long_, the division will be carried out
       using the arbitrary precision library, but the result will
       always be a native _long._

	 > > \* If _a_ and _b_ are both arbitrary-precision integers, the
       result will be computed to arbitrary precision, but demoted if
       it fits in a _long_.

	 > \* The binary _\+_ and _-_ operators, if either operand is an
     arbitrary-precision integer, shall promote the other operand to
     an arbitrary-precision integer, compute the result to arbitrary
     precision, and demote the result to _long_ if it fits. If both
     operands are native _long_, and _Tcl\_WideInt_ is larger than
     a native _long_, then the result will be computed to
     _Tcl\_WideInt_ precision, and demoted to _long_ if it fits.

	 > > In the case where _Tcl\_WideInt_ is only as wide as _long_,
     the operators shall test for overflow when adding numbers of like
     sign or subtracting numbers of opposite sign. If the sign of the
     result of one of these operations differs from the sign of the
     first operand, overflow has occurred; the result is promoted to
     an arbitrary precision integer and the sign is restored.

	 > \* The _<<_ operator shall fail if its second operand is an
     arbitrary-precision integer and the first is nonzero \(because
     this case must exceed the allowable number of digits\). It returns
     an arbitrary-precision integer if its first argument is an
     arbitrary-precision integer, or if the shift will overflow. The
     overflow check for _long_ values \(_a<<b_\) is

	 > > \* if _b_>LONG\_BITS-1, overflow.

	 > > \* if _a_>0, and \(a & -\(1<<\(LONG\_BITS-1-b\)\)\), overflow.

	 > > \* if _a_<0, and \(~a & -\(1<<LONG\_BITS-1-b\)\)\), overflow.

	 > \* The '>>' operator _a>>b_, shall return 0 \(_a>=0_\) or -1
     \(_a<0_\) if _b_ is an arbitrary-precision integer \(it would
     have shifted away all significant bits\). Otherwise, the shift
     shall be performed to the precision of _a_, and if _a_ was an
     arbitrary-precision integer, the result shall be demoted to a
     _long_ if it fits.

	 > \* The six comparison operators <, <=, ==, !=, >=, and >, can work
     knowing only the signs of the operands wben native _long_
     values are compared with arbitrary-precision integers.
     Arbitrary-precision comparison is needed only when comparing
     arbitrary-precision integers of like sign. In any case, the
     result is a native _long_.

	 > \* The _eq_, _ne_, _in_, and _ni_ operators work only on
     string representations and will not change.

	 > \* The _&&_ and _\|\|_ and _?:_ operators only test their
     operands for zero and will not change.

	 > \* The ~ operator shall follow the algebraic identity:

	 > > ~a == -a - 1

	 > > This identity holds if _a_ is represented in any word size
     large enough to hold it without overflowing. It therefore
     generalizes to integers of arbitary precision; essentially,
     negative numbers are thought of as "twos-complement numbers with
     an infinite number of 1 bits at the most significant end."

	 > \* The base case of the _&_ \(_a&b_\) operator shall be defined in
     the obvious way if _a_ and _b_ are both positive;
     corresponding bits of their binary representation will be ANDed
     together. For negative operands, the algebraic identity above,
     together with De Morgan's laws, can reduce the operation to the
     base case:

	 > > \* if a>=0, b<0, a&b == a & ~\( ~b \) == a & \( - b - 1 \)

	 > > \* if a<0, b>=0, symmetric with the above.

	 > > \* if a<0, b<0, a & b = ~\( ~a \| ~b \) = -\( \( -a - 1 \) \| \( -b - 1 \) \) - 1

	 > \* The base case of the _\|_ \(_a\|b_\) operator shall be defined in
     the obvious way if _a_ and _b_ are both positive:
     corresponding bits of their binary representation will be ORed
     together. For negative operands, the algebraic identity above,
     together with De Morgan's laws, can reduce the operation to the
     base case:

	 > > \* if a>=0, b<0, a\|b == ~\( ~a & ~b \) == -\( ~a & \( -b - 1 \)\) - 1

	 > > \* if a<0, b>=0, symmetric with the above.

	 > > \* if a<0, b<0, a\|b == ~\( ~a & ~b \) == -\( \( -a - 1 \) & \( -b - 1 \) \) - 1

	 > \* The base case of the _^_ \(_a^b_\) operator shall be defined in
     the obvious way if _a_ and _b_ are both positive:
     corresponding bits of their binary representation will be
     EXCLUSIVE ORed together. For negative operands, the algebraic
     identity above, together with the contrapositive law, can reduce
     the operation to the base case:

	 > > \* if a>=0, b<0, a^b == ~\( a ^ ~b \) == -\( a ^ \( -b - 1 \) \) - 1

	 > > \* if a<0, b>=0, symmetric with the above.

	 > > \* if a<0, b<0, a^b == ~a ^ ~b == \( -a - 1 \) ^ \( -b - 1 \)

	 > \* The abs\(\), ceil\(\), double\(\), floor\(\), int\(\), round\(\), sqrt\(\), and
     wide\(\) math functions shall all be modified to accept
     arbitrary-precision integers as parameters. All these functions
     will continue to return the same "type" as they do now \(integer
     vs. floating point\), but the domain and/or range will be extended
     to permit arbitrarily large integers as appropriate.

	 > \* A new function, _entier\($x\)_ will be introduced; the function
     coerces _$x_ to an integer of appropriate size. _entier\(\)_ is
     distinguished from _int\(\)_ in that _int\(\)_ results in an
     integer limited to the size of the native long integer always,
     while _entier\(\)_ results in whatever size of integer is needed
     to hold the full value.

 7. The **incr** and **dict incr** commands shall work on
    arbitary-precision values. Specifically, [incr a $n] will behave
    like [set a [expr { $a + $n }]] with the constraint that
    _$a_ and _$b_ must both be integers.

 8. The **format** and **scan** commands will acquire _%lld_,
    _%lli_, _%llo_, _%llx_ and _%llX_ specifiers that format
    their arguments as arbitrary-precision decimal, \(decimal/any
    format\), octal, and hexadecimal integers, respectively. The format
    specifier _%llu_ is invalid and will cause an error. The
    _%llo_ and _%llx_ specifiers, unlike their native-integer
    counterparts, will format _signed_ numbers; the result of
    [format %#llx -12345] will not be 0xffffcfc7, but rather
    -0x3039. \(If an application requires hexadecimal numbers in two's
    complement notation, it can get them by forcing a number to be
    positive:

		     set x -12345
		     set x64bit [expr { $x & ((1<<64) - 1) }]
		     format %#llx $x64bit

	 >  will yield '0xffffffffffffcfc7'.

 9. User defined math functions will be able to gain access to a
    _bignumValue_ only if they are created using the techniques
    described in [[232]](232.md). The Tcl command that implements the user
    defined math function will be able to receive a **bignum**
    Tcl\_Obj value just as it can receive any other Tcl\_ObjType. The
    legacy _Tcl\_Value_ structure, will **not** be updated to add a
    bignum-valued field.

 10. The number parser detailed in [[249]](249.md) will be adopted into the
    Tcl internals.  See [[249]](249.md) for details on the implications.

# Integration Details

The _libtommath_ source code shall be extracted from the
distributions available at <http://math.libtomcrypt.com/>  and brought
into the CVS repository as a _vendor branch_ \(see
<https://www.cvshome.org/docs/manual/cvs-1.11.18/cvs_13.html#SEC103> 
for a discussion of managing vendor branches. It appears that all the
necessary modifications to integrate this source code with Tcl can be
made in the single file, _tommath.h_; it is likely that the
_tools/_ directory in the Tcl source tree will contain a Tcl script
to make the modifications automatically when importing a new version.
CVS can maintain local modifications effectively, should we find it
necessary to patch the other sources.

The chief modification is that all the external symbols in the library
will have TclBN prepended to their names, so that they will not give
linking conflicts if an extension uses a 'tommath' library not
supplied with Tcl - or uses any other library compatible with the
Berkeley _mp_ API.

# Choice of Library

The _libtommath_ code is chosen from among a fairly large set of
possible third-party bignum codes. Among the ones considered were:

 GMP: The Gnu GMP library is probably the fastest and most complete of
  the codes available. Alas, it is licensed under LGPL, which would
  require all distributors who prepare binary Tcl distributions to
  include the GMP source code. I chose to avoid any legal
  entanglements, and avoided GMP for this reason.

 The original Berkeley mp library: This library is atrociously slow,
  and was avoided for that reason.

 Gnu Calc: GPL licensed. A non-starter for that reason.

 mpexpr: This Tcl extension has been available for many years and is
  released under the BSD license. \(It was the basis for Gnu Calc but
  predates the fork, and hence is not GPL-contaminated.\) It would
  certainly be a possibility, but the code is not terribly well
  documented, is slow by today's standards, and still uses
  string-based Tcl API's. It would be a considerable amount of work to
  bring it into conformance with today's Tcl core engineering
  practices.

 OpenSSL: The OpenSSL library includes a fast and well-documented
  bignum library \(developed so that OpenSSL can do RSA cryptography\).
  Alas, the code is licensed under the original BSD license agreement,
  and has several parties added to the dreaded Advertising Clause.
  The Advertising Clause would present serious difficulties for our
  distributors, and so OpenSSL is not suitable. \(The OpenSSL
  developers are not amenable to removing the Advertising Clause from
  the license.\)

Several libraries implemented in C\+\+ were dismissed out of hand,
because of the deployment issues associated with C\+\+ runtime libraries
and static constructors.

The _libtommath_ code is released to the Public Domain. Its author,
Tom St. Denis, explicitly and irrevocably authorizes its use for any
purpose, without fee, and without attribution. So license
incompatibilities aren't going to be an issue. The documentation is
wonderful \(Tom has written a book of several hundred pages
<http://book.libtomcrypt.com/draft/tommath.pdf>  describing the
algorithms used\), and the code is lucid.

The chief disadvantage to _libtommath_ is that it is a one-person
effort, and hence has the risk of becoming orphaned. I consider this
risk to be of acceptable severity, because of the quality of the code.
The Tcl maintainers could take it on quite readily.

# Additional Possibilities

The Tcl library will actually use only about one-third of
_libtommath_ to implement the _expr_ command. In particular, the
library functions for squaring, fast modular reduction, modular
exponentiation, greatest common divisor, least common multiple, Jacobi
symbol, modular inverse, primality testing and the solution of linear
Diophantine equations are not needed, and shall not be include in the
Tcl library to save memory footprint.

Nevertheless, these operations would be extremely useful in an
extension, so that programs that don't live with tight memory
constraints can do things like fast Diffie-Hellman or RSA
cryptography. We should probably consider a 'bignum' package to be
bundled with the core distribution that would add appropriate math
functions wrapping these operations.

# Reference Implementation

A feature complete implementation is present on the CVS branch called
'kennykb-numerics-branch'.

# Copyright

Copyright © 2005 by Kevin B. Kenny. All rights reserved.

This document may be distributed subject to the terms and conditions
set forth in the Open Publication License, version 1.0
<http://www.opencontent.org/openpub/> .

