# TIP 238: Fire Event when Widget Created
	Author:		Gerald W. Lester <Gerald.Lester@cox.net>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Pending
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Created:	25-Jan-2005
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:	Tk
-----

# Abstract

This TIP arranged for a new virtual event to be fired every time a widget is
created. This allows class bindings to automatically discover new widget
instances and act on their creation.

# Rationale

It would be useful if it was possible to set an event on class bindings to
allow custom code to be run when a widget of a particular class is created.

Note that the standard X11 <Create> event is not quite suitable, because that
is delivered to the X11 parent of the widget, which is not Tk in the case of
toplevel windows.

# Proposal

It is proposed that the virtual event <<Create>> be sent to every widget upon
the creation of its actual underlying window \(i.e. as part of
**Tk\_MakeWindowExist**\). Note that this is the earliest at which an event
can actually be delivered to the widget; before that, doing **event
generate** to the widget just creates an event that gets discarded.

## Example

	% bind Toplevel <<Create>> {
	    puts stdout {New toplevel called {%W} was created!}
	}
	% toplevel .foo
	New toplevel called {.foo} was created!

## Proposed C API Changes

No changes would be requried, this change is for the Tcl layer API.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation does _not_ yet exist.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

