# TIP 246: Unify Pattern Matching
	Author:         Reinhard Max <max@tclers.tk>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        27-Apr-2005
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       pattern,match,glob,exact,regexp,case sensitive,Tcl
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

Many Tcl commands take arguments that are patterns to match
against. Some of these commands allow options to specify whether the
pattern should be treated as a literal, a glob pattern, or a regular
expression, and whether or not matching should be case sensitive.
This TIP proposes a unique set of options for all commands that accept
pattern arguments.

# Rationale

It is hard to memorize which of the commands that take a pattern
argument allows to modify the matching mode, and in which way. With
this TIP in place pattern matching will be orthogonal throughout Tcl,
so the rules learned once can be applied to every command that uses
pattern matching.

# Current situation

The following commands currently take pattern arguments with varying
combinations of switches to specify their behaviour:

   * **array get** _arrayName_ ?_pattern_?

   * **array names** _arrayName_ ?_mode_? ?_pattern_?

   * **array values** _arrayName_ ?_pattern_?

   * **array unset** _arrayName_ ?_pattern_?

   * **dict filter** _dictionaryValue_ **key** _globPattern_

   * **dict filter** _dictionaryValue_ **value** _globPattern_

   * **dict keys** _dictionaryValue_ ?_globPattern_?

   * **dict values** _dictionaryValue_ ?_globPattern_?

   * **lsearch** ?_options..._? _list pattern_

   * **parray** _arrayName_ ?_pattern_?

   * **string match** ?**-nocase**? _pattern string_

   * **switch** ?_options..._? _string pattern body_

   * **namespace children** ?_namespace_? ?_pattern_?

   * **namespace export** ?**-clear**? ?_pattern pattern ..._?

   * **namespace forget** ?_pattern pattern ..._?

   * **namespace import** ?**-force**? ?_pattern pattern ..._?

   * **info commands** ?_pattern_?

   * **info functions** ?_pattern_?

   * **info globals** ?_pattern_?

   * **info locals** ?_pattern_?

   * **info procs** ?_pattern_?

   * **info vars** ?_pattern_?

   * **registry keys** _keyName_ ?_pattern_?

   * **registry values** _keyName_ ?_pattern_?

The following commands which also take pattern arguments are outside
the scope of this TIP:

   * Commands that match patterns against file names: **auto\_import**,
     **auto\_mkindex**, **pkg\_mkIndex**, **tcltest**.

   * Commands that use regular expressions by design: **regexp**,
     and **regsub**.

   * The **case** command, because it is deprecated

# Specification

The commands listed above shall allow for two optional switches, one
that specifies the matching mode, and can be **-exact**,
**-glob**, or **-regexp**, and one that specifies case
sensitivity, and can be **-case**, or **-nocase**. Their current
behaviour shall become the default behaviour in absence of the
respective switch. \(Some commands may accept other switches as well.\)

Also shall there be two new manual pages, one that describes glob
matching similar to the _re\_syntax_ page, and one that describes the
pattern matching options. These manuals shall be referenced by the
manuals for the individual commands instead of repeating the detailed
descriptions.

# Objections

Some of the mentioned commands could become somewhat slower when they
need to check for more options. This needs to be checked when
implementing this TIP.

# Reference Implementation

There is no reference implementation yet.

The idea is to have common code for option checking, and matching,
that can be used by all mentioned commands. That way it would be easy
to add new algorithms or options, and have them immediately available
for all commands that can do pattern matching.

The C API for this will first be worked out as a private API when
creating the reference implementation and later be published by a
separate TIP, so that extensions can also make use of it.

# Notes

There might be need for a similar unification in Tk as well, but
that's outside the scope of this TIP, and should be easy to add once
this TIP is implemented so that Tcl provides the needed
infrastructure.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

