# TIP 257: Object Orientation for Tcl
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
	Author:         Will Duquette <will@wjduquette.com>
	Author:         Steve Landers <steve@digitalsmarties.com>
	Author:         Jeff Hobbs <jeffh@activestate.com>
	Author:         Kevin Kenny <kennykb@acm.org>
	Author:         Miguel Sofer <mig@utdt.edu>
	Author:         Richard Suchenwirth <richard.suchenwirth-bauersachs@siemens.com>
	Author:         Larry W. Virden <lvirden@yahoo.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        26-Sep-2005
	Post-History:   
	Obsoletes:      50
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes adding OO support to the Tcl core, semantically inspired by
XOTcl. The commands it defines will be in the **::oo** namespace, which is
not used by any current mainstream OO system, and it will be designed
specifically to allow other object systems to be built on top.

# Rationale and Basic Requirements

Tcl has a long history of being comparatively agnostic about object-oriented
programming, not favouring one OO system over another while promoting a wealth
of OO extensions such as [incr Tcl]<http://incrtcl.sourceforge.net/itcl/> ,
OTcl<http://bmrc.berkeley.edu/research/cmt/cmtdoc/otcl/> ,
XOTcl<http://media.wu-wien.ac.at/> ,
stooop<http://jfontain.free.fr/stooop.html> ,
Snit<http://www.wjduquette.com/snit/> , etc. because in general, one size fits
nobody.

However, many application domains require OO systems and having a common such
base system will help prevent application and library authors from reinventing
the wheel each time through because they cannot rely on an OO framework being
present with each and every Tcl installation. For example, the http package
supplied with Tcl has its own internal object model, and a similar mechanism
is reinvented multiple times within tcllib. Other parts of tcllib do their own
thing \(to say nothing of the fact that both stooop and Snit are in tcllib
themselves\). This does not promote efficient reuse of each others code, and
ensures that each of these packages has a _poor_ object system. The request
for an OO system is also one of the biggest feature requests for Tcl, and
would make it far easier to implement megawidgets. It also leaves Tcl open to
the ill-informed criticism that it doesn't support OO, despite being spoilt
for choice in reality through the extensions listed above.

Given all this, the time has come for the core to provide OO support. The aim
of the core OO system shall be that it is simple to get started with, flexible
so that it can take you a long way, fast \(we all know that we're going to get
compared on this front!\), and suitable for use as a foundation of many other
things, including the re-implementation of various existing OO extensions,
including those that are currently compiled and also those that are pure Tcl
extensions.

Another requirement is that programmers should not have to alter all of their
existing code in order to get started with the new system; rather, they should
be able to adopt it progressively, over time, because it supports better ways
of working \(e.g., faster and more flexible libraries\).

# The Foundational OO System

This TIP proposes that the foundation of the OO system should ensure that it
is simple, fast and flexible. Semantically, the OO system should be using the
semantic model pioneered by OTcl and XOTcl, as leveraging their experience on
the complex parts \(e.g., the model of multiple inheritance, how to invoke
superclass implementations of a method\) allows us to go straight to a solution
that is rich enough for a very large space of applications.

However, some changes relative to XOTcl are necessary. Certain aspects of
XOTcl syntax are peculiar from a conventional OO point-of-view, and it is
deeply unfortunate that a very large number of methods are predefined in the
XOTcl base class. XOTcl's approach to object creation options is also highly
idiosyncratic \(though critical to the way XOTcl itself works\) and doesn't
really support the typical Tcl idioms. The changes must be made in such a way
that something that works like classic XOTcl for virtually all uses can be
built on the new framework, but the core object framework must also enable
building [incr Tcl]-like or Snit-like object systems on top.

Note that by keeping things in the base classes comparatively simple, it is
much easier to build multiple extended OO frameworks on top.

## Key Features

### Functional Requirements

 * Class-based object system. This is what most programmers expect from OO,
   and it is very useful for many tasks.

 * Allows per-object customization and dynamic redefinition of classes.

 * Supports advanced OO features, such as:

	 > meta-classes: These are subclasses of **class**, which permit more
   advanced customization of class behaviour.

	 > filters: These are constraints \(implemented in Tcl code, naturally\) on
   whether a method may be called.

	 > mixins: These allow functionality to be brought into an object from other
   objects if necessary, enabling better separation of concerns.

 * A system for implementing methods in custom ways, so that package authors
   that want significantly different ways of doing a method implementation may
   do so fairly simply. Note that this will require additional C code to
   perform; this API will not be exposed directly to the script level \(since
   it makes little sense there\).

### Non-Functional Requirements

Note that these requirements would need to be imposed on any implementation of
an object system in the Tcl core code anyway.

 * The speed of the object system is something on which it is easy to predict
   that Tcl will end up being compared to other languages. Hence, the core OO
   system _must_ permit efficient implementation.

 * The core OO system must be clear code that it is easy for the Tcl
   maintainers to keep in good order. The Engineering Manual [[247]](247.md) will be
   followed.

## Key Alterations Relative to XOTcl

The core OO system can be considered to be a derivative of XOTcl, much as C
can be considered to be a derivative of Algol. However, like the C/Algol
relationship, there are many changes between the core OO system and XOTcl; the
_implementations_ are not common.

 * Object and class names in the core extension to be all lower-case, in line
   with best common practice in general Tcl code.

 * Methods have to be capable of being non-exported, by which we mean that
   they are not \(simply\) callable from contexts outside the object.

 * The majority of the API for updating an object or class's definition is to
   be moved to a separate utility command, **oo::define**.

 * More "conventional" naming of operations is to be used.

 * Many of the more advanced features of XOTcl are not present, especially
   when it is possible to implement them on top of other features. This
   particularly applies to:

	 > \* Filter- and mixin-guards

	 > \* Invariants

	 > \* Pre- and post-conditions

Note that this TIP does _not_ propose to actually include any XOTcl \(or Itcl
or Snit or ...\) compatibility packages in the core; it is about forming a
foundation on which they can be built \(which happens to also be a
comparatively lightweight OO system in itself\). Such compatibility packages
can either remain separate code, or be the subject of future TIPs.

# Detailed Rationale for Not Using XOTcl

## Features of XOTcl that are Retained

Many key semantic features of XOTcl are adopted with little or no change. In
particular, the following critical features of the core object system shall be
semantically the same as in XOTcl as they represent the best-of-breed in
advanced object systems at the moment.

### Multiple Inheritance

We shall support multiple inheritance \(MI\) because this is very difficult to
add after the fact.

The main problem with MI in languages like C\+\+ was always confusion caused by
the fact that methods were resolved using integer offsets into method tables.
By contrast, single inheritance is far too restrictive. By supporting mixins
and filters, it becomes possible to build not just conventional OO systems in
the C\+\+ or Java mould, but also to make Self-like prototype systems \(which
requires mixins and subclassing of the class of classes to work\) and
Aspect-like systems \(which require filters for efficient implementation\). As
these are less well-known terms than those of normal inheritance, we define
them here:

 mixin: An auxiliary _class_ whose behaviour is "mixed into" the current
   object or class, adding the mixin's methods to the target's methods. Often
   used to support cross-cutting functionality or object roles.

 filter: A nominated _method_ that is permitted to control whether all calls
   to any other method of a class or object occur. This control is achieved by
   the nominated filter method being chained on the front of the sequence of
   methods in the "implementation list" for the actual target method. Often
   used to support transparent orthogonal functionality, such as access
   control or result caching.

### The Method Dispatch Algorithm

The use of a complex class graph model as described above requires a
sophisticated algorithm to linearize any particular call of a method into a
sequence of method implementations that should be called. This is the method
dispatch algorithm. The algorithm works by scanning the graph of the object
and its associated classes in the order given below, collecting
implementations as they are found in a list, with an implementation coming in
the _last_ position in the list it can be; if it would be in twice because
of an "inheritance diamond", it comes in the later location.

 1. Filters defined on classes mixed into the object or its class \(or
    superclasses\), with filters from a particular class processed in the order
    that they are described by that class.

 2. Filters defined on the object, in the order that they are described in the
    object's filter list.

 3. Filters defined on the class of the object \(or its superclasses\), with
    filters from a particular class processed in the order that they are
    described by that class.

 4. Methods declared by mixins added to the object, with mixins being
    processed in the order that they are described in the object's mixin list
    \(the set of methods declared by the mixin are determined by recursively
    applying this algorithm\).

 5. Methods declared by mixins added to the object's class or superclasses,
    with mixins to a particular class being processed in the order that they
    are described in the class's mixin list.

 6. Methods declared by the object itself.

 7. Methods declared by the object's class itself.

 8. Methods declared by the object's class's superclasses, with superclasses
    being processed in the order that they are described in the class's
    superclass list.

Given the above ordering, for each method on an object there is an ordered
list of implementations. We dispatch the method by executing the first
implementation on the list, which can then hand off to subsequent methods in
the list in order using the **next** command \(described below\).

Another way to view the ordering is that there are several layers to the
ordering scheme. Firstly, there is the basic ordering which is: object, class,
superclasses to root \(with multiple inheritance being processed in the listed
order, and classes appearing in the linearized tree as late as possible\). Then
there is the second-order ordering, which adds mixins to the front of the
basic ordering, where the order of the mixins is processed in basic ordering.
Finally, there is the third-order ordering which adds filters to the front of
the second-order ordering, with filter name sources being processed in
second-order ordering and the method chain for a particular filter being
processed in second-order ordering order.

Note that a filter being invoked as a filter is different to a filter being
invoked as a normal method. If a filter method is invoked directly, then it
will actually be invoked twice, once as a filter and once as a conventional
method.

## Essential Changes Relative to XOTcl

Unfortunately, not all features of XOTcl are suitable for a core object
system. In particular, many more syntactic features need to be altered. This
section describes these, together with the rationale for each change; the
rationales are marked with the word "**Therefore**", in bold.

### Exported vs. Non-exported Methods

In XOTcl, every class and every object has an associated namespace. The
namespace associated with a class _::myclass_ is
_::xotcl::classes::myclass_; the namespace associated with object
_::myobject_ is simply _::myobject_. XOTcl "instprocs" are simply procs
defined in a class \(or superclass\) namespace; XOTcl per-object "procs" are
simply procs defined in an object's namespace. _Every such proc becomes an
object subcommand._

This is part of the reason why XOTcl objects have such cluttered interfaces.
Every method which is of use to the object appears in the object's interface -
and there's no way to prevent this.

**Therefore**, in the new oo system "**proc**s" and "**instproc**s" can
be exported or non-exported. Exported procs appear as object subcommands;
non-exported procs do not, but remain available as subcommands of the **my**
command. In this way, the object itself can still use them, but they need
appear in the object's interface only if desired.

Additionally, the standard introspection system will need to be extended to
allow determining of which methods are exported and which are not.

### The oo::define Command

In XOTcl, the commands to define per-class methods, filters, and so on are
subcommands of the class object; the commands to define per-object methods,
filters, and so on are subcommands of the individual object. This is a
problem, as it confuses the implementation-time interface with the run-time
interface. The design is logical, given XOTcl's extreme dynamism; any
implementation-time activity, such as defining a method or adding a filter can
indeed be done at run-time. But again, this makes it difficult to define clean
run-time interfaces for reusable library code.

The solution described in the previous section, of making some methods private
by declaring them non-exported, does not give us a full solution; having the
**instproc** subcommand available only from instance code isn't all that
useful.

**Therefore**, we add two new commands, **oo::define** and
**oo::objdefine**, which are used to define methods, filters, and so on.
They can be called in two ways, with each command having essentially the same
fundamental syntax. The first calling model is as follows:

 > **oo::define** _class subcommand args..._

 > **oo::objdefine** _object subcommand args..._

For example, the following XOTcl code defines a class with two methods:

	xotcl::Class myclass
	myclass instproc dothis {args} { # body }
	myclass instproc dothat {args} { # body }

In the new oo core, the matching code would be this:

	oo::class create myclass
	oo::define myclass method dothis {args} { # body }
	oo::define myclass method dothat {args} { # body }

The two definition commands will also have a second calling model, in which
they get passed a single definition script whose commands are the subcommands
supported by the command as described above:

 > **oo::define** _class script_

 > **oo::objdefine** _object script_

Thus, the above code could also be written as follows:

	oo::class create myclass
	oo::define myclass {
	    method dothis {args} { # body }
	    method dothat {args} { # body }
	}

Finally, the constructor for the **oo::class** class is extended so that
such a script can be used during class creation:

	oo::class create myclass {
	    method dothis {args} { # body }
	    method dothat {args} { # body }
	}

This allows a class to be defined cleanly and concisely, while guaranteeing
that all class details can still be modified later on using **oo::define**.

To enable the easy definition of details of the class object at class
definition time, a special subcommand, "**self**", will be provided that is
equivalent to using **oo::objdefine** on the class.

Note that because of the requirement for a distinction between public and
private interfaces, **oo::define** and **oo::objdefine** will need two
subcommands XOTcl doesn't currently provide: **export** and **unexport**.
**export** takes as arguments a list of method names; all named methods are
exported and become visible in the object or class's interface. **unexport**
does the opposite. Note that by default, all methods that start with a
lower-case letter \(specifically, names matching the glob pattern "[a-z]\*"\)
will be exported by default and all other methods will be unexported.

### Standard Metaclasses

XOTcl defines two standard Metaclasses, _xotcl::Object_ and
_xotcl::Class_. _xotcl::Object_ is the root of the class hierarchy; all
XOTcl classes implicitly inherit from _xotcl::Object_. XOTcl classes are
themselves objects, and are instances of _xotcl::Class_. _xotcl::Class_
can itself be subclassed to produce different families of classes with
different standard behaviours.

The new core object system will use the same basic mechanism, based on the
metaclasses **oo::object** and **oo::class**. However, one of the problems
with XOTcl is that XOTcl objects have too much standard behavior; the new core
object system must provide a simpler foundation, with the XOTcl behavior
optionally available.

**Therefore**, we will extract the features of _xotcl::Object_ and
_xotcl::Class_ that are critical into our classes and leave all other
functionality up to any subclasses or metaclasses that are defined.

Thus **oo::object** will be the root of the class hierarchy. However,
instances of **oo::object** will have a minimal set of standard methods, so
that clean interfaces can be built on top of it, as can be done with Snit
types and instances.

Core object system classes will be instances of **oo::class** or its
subclasses. Likewise, **oo::class** will define only minimal behaviour.

### Inheritance

A class may wish to make use of the capabilities of **oo::class** internally
without exporting its methods \(e.g., for providing a singleton instance\).

**Therefore**, the inheritance mechanism should be extended such that the
newly defined class can declare whether a parent class's methods should be
exported or not, on a case-by-case basis. 

### Object Creation

XOTcl has a unique creation syntax. The object name can be followed by what
look like Tk or Snit options - but aren't. Instead, any token in the argument
list that begins with a hyphen is assumed to be the name of one of the
object's methods; it must be followed by the method's own arguments. For
example, a standard XOTcl class will have a "set" method, which has the same
syntax as the standard Tcl "set" command. Thus, the following code:

	    myclass myobj -set a 1 -set b 2

creates an instance of "myclass" called "myobj" whose instance variables "a"
and "b" and set to 1 and 2 respectively. This is an intriguing and innovative
interface, and it is unlike any other Tcl object system. Additionally, it
makes it difficult to implement standard Tk-like options.

**Therefore**, standard core object system classes will not use this
mechanism \(though it might be available on demand by inheriting from some
other standard metaclass\). Instead, standard core object system classes will
have no creation behavior other than that implemented by their designers in
their constructors.

Constructors may have any argument list the user pleases, including default
arguments, the "args" argument \(as in the **proc** command\), and XOTcl-style
non-positional arguments. It is up to the developer to handle the arguments
appropriately.

It is expected that one of the key responsibilities of any XOTcl compatability
package would be to define an object/class construction system that parses the
arguments in the expected way and uses them to invoke methods on the newly
created object.

### Constructor Syntax

In XOTcl, a class's constructor is implemented using its "init" instproc. This
is troubling; constructors are intended to do things just once, and are often
written to take advantage of that, whereas an "init" instproc can
theoretically be called at any time. For any given class, then, one of two
conditions will obtain: either "init" must be written so that it can be called
at any time, or the class will have an inherent logic bug.

**Therefore**, the class constructor will not be implemented as a standard
instproc. Instead, the **oo::define** command will have a new subcommand,
**constructor**, which will be used as follows:

	oo::define myclass constructor {} {
	    # body
	}

The constructor so defined will act almost exactly like an instproc; it may
call superclass constructors using the "super" command, etc. However, it may
never be called explicitly, but only via the class's "create" and "new"
methods.

### Destructor Syntax

In XOTcl, a class's destructor is defined by overriding the "destroy"
instproc. This is problematic for two reasons: first, a destructor doesn't
need an argument list. An instproc is too powerful for the task. Second,
successful destruction should not depend on the destructor's chaining to its
superclass destructors properly.

**Therefore**, the class destructor will be defined by a new subcommand of
**oo::define**, **destructor**, as follows:

	oo::define myclass destructor {
	    # Body
	}

The destructor has no argument list.

The destructor cannot be called explicitly. Instead, the destructors are
invoked in the proper order by the standard **destroy** method \(defined in
**oo::object**\), which need never be overridden.

If an error occurs in a destructor, it will _not_ prevent the object from
being deleted. There is no guarantee to run destructors when an interpreter or
Tcl-enabled process exits.

### Behavior and Syntax of next

In XOTcl, the **next** command is used to invoke the "next" method in the
dispatch chain. It optionally takes arguments to process \(if they are omitted,
it passes all arguments that were passed to the current method\) and it calls
the appropriate superclass implementation. But it does so without adjusting
the Tcl stack, which forces classes to take extreme care when implementing
code that needs to access variables or evaluate scripts in the scope of the
code that invoked the method in the first place.

**Therefore**, the **next** command will perform Tcl stack management so
that using **uplevel** and **upvar** in a method will be just like doing
so in a normal procedure, no matter how the class containing that method is
subclassed.

In addition, the adoption of [[157]](157.md) makes explicit handling of arguments
practical as code does not need to perform potentially troublesome operations
with **eval**, and so **next** will always require that all argument be
passed explicitly. This also makes it easier to decide to pass no arguments to
a superclass implementation.

## Desirable Changes

The changes described in this section are not absolutely essential to meeting
the goals described earlier. However, they are desirable in that they lead to
cleaner, more maintainable code.

### Class vs. Object Method Naming

XOTcl has many features which can be applied to a class for use by all class
instances, or to a single object. For example, a "filter" can be defined for a
single object, while an "instfilter" can be defined for a class and applied to
all instances of that class.

This is exactly backward. Most behavior will be defined for classes;
additional per-object behavior is the special case, and consequently should
have the less convenient name.

**Therefore**, all definition subcommands that begin with "inst" will be
defined, in the core OO system without their "inst" prefix; the per-object
subcommands will be manipulated via **oo::objdefine** or through the "self"
prefix command \(described above\), to indicate that it is operating on the
object itself and not the members of the class. Thus, a filter is defined on a
class for its instances using the "filter" subcommand; a filter is defined on
a particular object using the "self filter" subcommand \(actually a subcommand
of a subcommand\).

	 oo::define someCls {
	     method foo {} {...}
	     self {
	         method bar {args} {...}
	         filter bar
	     }
	 }

### Procs vs. Methods

The word "proc" conveys a standalone function; an object's subcommands are
more typically described as its "methods".

**Therefore**, the core OO system will use "method" in place of "proc" for
definitions.

### Public Names

In XOTcl, the main objects are _xotcl::Class_ and _xotcl::Object_.
However, the Tcl Style Guide dictates that public command names begin with a
lower-case letter.

**Therefore**, all public names in the _oo::_ namespace \(i.e. the standard
classes\) will begin with a lower case letter, e.g., the standard core object
system equivalents of _xotcl::Class_ and _xotcl::Object_ will be
**oo::class** and **oo::object**.

This does not constrain any code making use of the OO system from naming
objects however it wants.

# API Specification

This section documents the core object system API in detail, based on the
essential and desirable changes discussed in the previous sections.

## Helper Commands

The namespace\(s\) that define the following three commands are not defined in
this specification unless otherwise stated; all that is defined is that they
will be on the object's **namespace path** during the execution of any
method and should always be used without qualification.

### my

The **my** command allows methods of the current object to be called during
the execution of a method, just as if they were invoked using the object's
command. Unlike the object's command, the **my** command may also invoke
non-exported methods.

 > **my** _methodName_ ?_arg_ _arg_ ...?

Note that each object has its own **my** command; they are all distinct from
each other. This means that it is suitable for use for things like invoking
callbacks \(from general Tcl code\) that are non-public methods. In particular,
the use of **namespace code** for encapsulating the use of **my** for
invoking unexported callback methods by non-object code is supported.

Note that the **my** command does not represent the name of the object.

### next

The **next** command allows methods to invoke the implementation of the
method with the same name in their superclass \(as determined by the normal
inheritance rules; if a per-object method overrides a method defined by the
object's class, then the **next** command inside the object's method
implementation will invoke the class's implementation of the method\). The
arguments to the **next** command are the arguments to be passed to the
superclass method. The current stack level is temporarily bypassed for the
duration of the processing of the **next** command; this allows a method to
always execute identically with respect to the main calling context without
needing to use some form of introspection to determine where that context is
on the call frame stack \(with a side effect of isolating method
implementations from each other\).

 > **next** ?_arg_ _arg_ ...?

It is an error to invoke the **next** command when there is no superclass
definition of the current method.

### self

The **self** command allows executing methods to discover information about
the object which they are currently executing in; it's always an error if not
inside a method. Without arguments, the **self** command returns the current
fully-qualified name of the object \(to promote backward compatability\).
Otherwise, it is a command in the form of an ensemble \(though it is not
defined whether it is manipulable with **namespace ensemble**\).

The following subcommands of **self** are defined. None of these subcommands
take additional arguments.

 caller: Returns a three-item list describing the class, object and method
   that invoked the current method, respectively. The syntax is as follows:

 > **self caller**

 class: Returns the name of the class that defines the currently executing
   method. If the method was declared in the object instead of in the class,
   this returns the class of the object containing the method definition. The
   syntax is as follows:

 > **self class**

 filter: When invoked inside a filter, returns a three-item list describing
   the object or class for which the filter has been registered. The first
   element is the name of the class or object, the second element is either
   **class** \(for a filter defined on a class for its instances\) or
   **object** \(for a filter defined on a single object\), and the third
   element is the name of the method. The syntax is as follows:

 > **self filter**

 method: Returns the name of the currently executing method. The syntax is as
   follows:

 > **self method**

 namespace: Returns the namespace associated with the current object. The
   syntax is as follows:

 > **self namespace**

 next: Returns a two-element list describing the method that will be executed
   when the **next** command is invoked, or an empty list if there is no
   subsequent definition for the method. The first element of the list is the
   name of the object or class that contains the method, and the second
   element of the list is the name of the method. The syntax is as follows:

 > **self next**

 object: Returns the name of the current object, the same as if the **self**
   command is invoked with no arguments. The syntax is as follows:

 > **self object**

 target: When invoked from a filter, returns a two-item list consisting of the
   name of the class that holds the target method and the name of the target
   method. The syntax is as follows:

 > **self target**

For all these commands, when the name of a method is returned, it will be
"_<constructor>_" when the method is a constructor, and "_<destructor>_"
when the method is a destructor. It should be noted that these are not the
actual names of the constructor and destructor \(they are unnamed methods\);
they are just notational conventions supported by the **self** command.

## The oo::define Command

 > **oo::define** _class_ _subcommand_ ?_arg_ ...?

 > **oo::define** _class_ _script_

 > **oo::objdefine** _object_ _subcommand_ ?_arg_ ...?

 > **oo::objdefine** _object_ _script_

The **oo::define** command is used to add behavior to classes, and the
**oo::objdefine** command is used to add behavior to objects. The first form
of each command is conventional for ensemble-like commands, except that the
_class_ or _object_ argument precedes the _subcommand_ argument. In the
second form of each command, _script_ is a Tcl script whose commands are the
subcommands of **oo::define** or **oo::objdefine**; this is a notational
convenience, as the two forms are semantically equivalent in what their
capabilities are. \(Note that the context in which _script_ executes is
otherwise not defined.\)

### Class-related Subcommands

The subcommands of **oo::define** \(which may be unambiguously abbreviated
in both the subcommand form and the script form\) shall be:

 * **constructor** - this takes two arguments \(a **proc**-style argument
   list, and a body script\), and sets the constructor for the instances of the
   class to be executed as defined by the body script after binding the actual
   arguments to the call that creates an instance of the class to the formal
   arguments listed. The constructor is called after the object is created but
   before any instance variables are guaranteed to be set. If no constructor
   is specified, the constructor will accept exactly the same arguments as the
   constructor in the parent class, and will delegate all the arguments to
   that parent-class constructor. The syntax is as follows:

	 > **oo::define** _class_ **constructor** _argList_ _body_

	 > Note that constructors of class mixins are also called, but constructors of
   object mixins are never called \(as the object must exist before it can have
   an auxiliary class mixed into it\).

 * **destructor** - this defines the class destructor; a destructor is like
   a method but takes no arguments. Destructors are called on all classes that
   define them when the object is deleted, including classes that have been
   mixed in. The syntax is as follows:

	 > **oo::define** _class_ **destructor** _body_

	 > Note that destructors _should always_ use the **next** command within
   their implementation so that destructors of parent classes are also
   executed.

	 > Note also that destructors are called whenever the object is deleted by
   any mechanism \(except when the overall interpreter is deleted, when
   execution of Tcl scripts has ceased to be possible anyway\).

 * **export** - this specifies that the named methods are exported, i.e.,
   part of the public API of the class's instances. The syntax is as follows:

	 > **oo::define** _class_ **export** _name_ ?_name_ ...?

	 > An exported method is accessible to clients of the class's instances; an
   unexported method is accessible only to the instances' own code through the
   **my** command.

 * **filter** - this subcommand controls the list of filter methods for a
   class. Each filter method in the list is called when any method is invoked
   on the class's instances, and it is up to the filter to decide whether to
   invoke the filtered method call \(using the **next** command\) or return a
   suitable replacement value. The syntax is as follows:

	 > **oo::define** _class_ **filter** ?_filterName filterName_ ...?

 * **forward** - this subcommand defines a class method which is
   automatically forwarded \(i.e. delegated\) to some other command, according
   to a simple pattern. Each _arg_ is used literally. The syntax is as
   follows:

	 > **oo::define** _class_ **forward** _name_ _targetCmd_
   ?_arg_ ...?

 * **method** - this subcommand \(only valid for classes\) defines a class
   method \(i.e. a method supported by every instance of the class\). By
   default, methods are exported if they start with a lower-case letter \(i.e.,
   any character in \\u0061 to \\u007a inclusive\) and are not exported
   otherwise. The syntax is as follows:

	 > **oo::define** _class_ **method** _name_ _args_ _body_

 * **mixin** - This subcommand defines a mixin for a class which is a way of
   bringing in additional method implementations \(which may add to or wrap
   existing methods\) on an _ad hoc_ basis. The list of mixins is traversed
   when searching for methods before the inheritance hierarchy, and mixed-in
   methods may chain to any methods they override using the **next**
   command. The syntax is as follows:

	 > **oo::define** _class_ **mixin** ?_mixinClass mixinClass_ ...?

 * **self** - This subcommand, which has the same syntax patterns as
   **oo::objdefine**, allows the manipulation of the class as an object. See
   **oo::objdefine** below for a description of the list of subcommands of
   **self**. The syntaxes are as follows:

	 > **oo::define** _class_ **self** _subcommand_ ?_arg_ ...?

	 > **oo::define** _class_ **self** _script_

 * **superclass** - This specifies the superclass \(or classes\) of a class.
   Note that objects are always either classes or not classes, and cannot be
   changed from one to the other by any mechanism. The syntax is as follows:

	 > **oo::define** _class_ **superclass** _classList_

 * **unexport** - This specifies that the named methods are unexported,
   i.e., private. The syntax is as follows:

	 > **oo::define** _class_ **unexport** _name_ ?_name_ ...?

	 > An exported method is accessible to clients of the object; an unexported
   method is accessible only to the object's own code, through the **my**
   command.

The following utility subcommands are also supported:

 * **deletemethod** - This deletes one or more methods from a class; it
   doesn't modify any definitions of the method in superclasses, subclassses,
   instances or mixins. The method names must be specified exactly. Syntax is
   as follows:

	 > **oo::define** _class_ **deletemethod** _name_ ?_name_ ...?

 * **renamemethod** - This renames a method in a class from one thing to
   another; it doesn't modify any definitions of the method in superclasses,
   subclassses, instances or mixins. Syntax is as follows:

	 > **oo::define** _class_ **renamemethod** _fromName_ _toName_

### Per-Object Subcommands

The following subcommands are all per-object versions of the class subcommands
listed above. When they are applied to a class, they operate on the class
instance itself as an object, and not on the instances \(current and future\) of
that class \(which is why the distinction is required\).

 * **class** - This subcommand gets and sets the class of an object.
   Changing the class of an object can result in many methods getting added or
   removed. Objects may not be changed between being class-objects and and
   non-class objects. The syntax is as follows:

	 > **oo::objdefine** _object_ **class** _className_

	 > Note that when the class is changed of an object, no methods are called on
   that object, or on either the source or target classes, to indicate that
   the change has been carried out. This is up to the caller of the
   **class** subcommand.

 * **deletemethod** - This is a per-object version of the **deletemethod**
   subcommand of **oo::define**, to which it is syntactically identical.

 * **export** - This is a per-object version of the **export** subcommand
   of **oo::define**, to which it is syntactically identical.

 * **filter** - This is a per-object version of the **filter** subcommand
   of **oo::define**, to which it is syntactically identical.

 * **forward** - This is a per-object version of the **forward**
   subcommand of **oo::define**, to which it is syntactically identical.

 * **method** - This is a per-object version of the **method** subcommand
   of **oo::define**, to which it is syntactically identical.

 * **mixin** - This is a per-object version of the **mixin** subcommand of
   **oo::define**, to which it is syntactically identical.

 * **renamemethod** - This is a per-object version of the **renamemethod**
   subcommand of **oo::define**, to which it is syntactically identical.

 * **unexport** - This is a per-object version of the **unexport**
   subcommand of **oo::define**, to which it is syntactically identical.

## The oo::copy Command

The **oo::copy** command creates an exact copy of an object with the given
name. If _newName_ is the empty string or unspecified, a new name will be
generated automatically. The syntax is as follows:

 > **oo::copy** _object_ ?_newName_?

Note that this command does _not_ copy the backing namespace, and nor does
it execute any constructors. It is therefore up to the caller to copy such
internal state of the object in the manner suitable for the object and its
class tree; it is suggested that this be done by wrapping the **oo::copy**
command in another command that defines which method is called.

# Core Objects

The following classes are defined, and are the only pre-constructed objects in
the core system.

## oo::object

The root of the class hierarchy is **oo::object**. There are two ways to
create a new instance of an object.

 > **oo::object** **create** _name_

 > **set** _var_ **[** **oo::object** **new** **]**

The first constructs a new object called _name_ of class _oo::object_; the
object is represented as a command in the current scope. The second constructs
a new object of class **oo::object** with a name guaranteed to be different
from every existing command and returns the fully qualified of the command
created \(which it is naturally a good idea to save in a variable, perhaps
called _var_\).

The name of an object is also the name of a command in the form of an ensemble
where the subcommands of the ensemble are the _exported_ method names of the
object. The command is not manipulable with **namespace ensemble**, but may
be renamed.

The new object has one predefined exported method \(**destroy**\) and four
predefined non-exported methods \(**eval**, **unknown**, **variable** and
**varname**\). Other subcommands and other behaviour can be added using
**oo::define**.

The **oo::object** class \(an instance of **oo::class**\) serves as the base
class for all other core OO system classes.

### Constructor and Destructor

The constructor for the **oo::object** class takes no arguments and does
nothing. \(The actual construction of an object is special and happens before
any constructors are called.\)

The destructor does nothing. \(The actual destruction of an object is special
and happens after all destructors have completed.\)

### Methods

The instances of **oo::object** \(i.e. all objects and classes\) have the
following methods:

 eval: This non-exported method concatenates its arguments according to the
   rules of **concat**, and evaluates the resulting script in the namespace
   associated with the object. The result of the script evaluation is the
   result of the _object_ **eval** method. The syntax is as follows:

 > _object_ **eval** ?_arg_ _arg_ ...?

 destroy: This exported method deletes the object; it takes no additional
   arguments and returns the empty string as its result. The syntax is as
   follows:

 > _object_ **destroy**

 unknown: This non-exported method takes a method name and an arbitrary number
   of extra arguments and handles the absence of a method with the given name.
   The default implementation just generates a suitable error message that
   explains what commands are available given how the caller attempted to
   invoke the method, and ignores all the additional arguments. The syntax is
   as follows:

 > _object_ **unknown** _methodName_ ?_arg_ ...?

 > Note that this method is not normally invoked directly.

 variable: This non-exported method takes an arbitrary number of
   _unqualified_ variable names and binds the variable with that name in the
   object's namespace to the same name in the current scope, provided the
   current scope is the body of a procedure, procedure-like method, or lambda
   term \(as used with **apply**\); if executed in a context where the current
   scope does not admit local variables, this method will have no effect. The
   syntax is as follows:

 > _object_ **variable** ?_varName_ _varName_ ...?

 > However, it will be more commonly used as:

 > **my variable** ?_varName_ _varName_ ...?

 > Each _varName_ argument is the name of a variable in the namespace
   associated with the object, and must not contain any namespace separators.
   Each named variable will be bound to a local variable in the current scope
   with the same name.

 varname: This non-exported method takes one argument, the name of a variable
   to be resolved in the context of the object's namespace, and returns the
   fully qualified name of the variable such that it can be used with the
   **vwait** command or extensions such as Tk \(e.g., for the **label**
   widget's **-textvariable** option\). This method does not assign any value
   to the variable. The syntax is as follows:

 > _object_ **varname** _varName_

 > However, it will be more commonly used as:

 > **my varname** _varName_

### Unknown Method Handling

When an attempt is made to invoke an unknown method on any object, the core
then attempts to pass _all_ the arguments \(including the method name\) to
the **unknown** method of the object. The default implementation of the
**unknown** method is specified by the **oo::object** class, and just
generates a suitable "unknown subcommand" error message.

## oo::class

This class is the class of all classes \(i.e. its instances are objects that
manufacture objects according to a standard pattern\). Note that
**oo::object** is an instance of **oo::class**, as is **oo::class**
itself.

 > **oo::class** **create** _name_ ?_definition_?

This creates a new class called _name_; the class is an object in its own
right \(of class **oo::class**\), and hence is represented as a command in the
current scope. **oo::class** returns the fully qualified command name.

The newly-created class command is used to define objects which belong to the
class, just as **oo::object** is. By default, instances of the new class
have no more behaviour than instances of **oo::object** do; new class
behavior can be added to the class in two ways. First, a _definition_ can be
specified when creating the class; second, additional behaviour can be added
to the class using **oo::define**.

The definition, if given, consists of a series of statements that map to the
subcommands of **oo::define**. The following three code snippets are
equivalent; each defines a class called **::dog** whose instances will have
two subcommands: **bark** and **chase**.

	# Method 1
	oo::class create dog
	
	oo::define dog method bark {} {
	    puts "Woof, woof!"
	}
	
	oo::define dog method chase {thing} {
	    puts "Chase $thing!"
	}

	# Method 2
	oo::class create dog
	
	oo::define dog {
	    method bark {} {
	        puts "Woof, woof!"
	    }
	
	    method chase {thing} {
	        puts "Chase $thing!"
	    }
	}

	# Method 3
	oo::class create dog {
	    method bark {} {
	        puts "Woof, woof!"
	    }
	
	    method chase {thing} {
	        puts "Chase $thing!"
	    }
	}

### Constructor and Destructor

The constructor for **oo::class** concatenates its arguments and passes the
resulting script to **oo::define** \(along with the fully-qualified name of
the created class, of course\).

Classes have no destructor by default. \(Actual class destruction is special,
and happens after all destructors have been executed.\)

### Methods

The instances of **oo::class** have the following methods:

 create: Creates a new instance of the class with the given name. All
   subsequent arguments are given to the class's constructor \(and so must
   actually match the syntax pattern specified in the constructor definition\).
   The result of the **create** method is always the fully-qualified name of
   the newly-created object. The syntax is as follows:

 > _class_ **create** _objName_ ?_arg_ _arg_ ...?

 new: Creates a new instance of the class with an automatically chosen name.
   All subsequent arguments are given to the class's constructor \(and so must
   actually match the syntax pattern specified in the constructor definition\).
   The result of the **new** method is always the fully-qualified name of
   the newly-created object. The syntax is as follows:

 > _class_ **new** ?_arg_ _arg_ ...?

 > Note that the _oo::class_ object itself does not export the **new**
   method; it is good practice for all classes to have names.

 createWithNamespace: Creates a new instance of a class with a given name and
   a given name of backing namespace. This method \(required to provide proper
   support for putting [incr Tcl] on top of the core OO system\) is not
   exported by default. Apart from the _nsName_ parameter, it is the same as
   the **create** method.

 > _class_ **createWithNamespace** _objName nsName_ ?_arg arg_ ...?

# Introspection Support

The core Tcl **info** command shall be extended in the following ways.

## An [info object] Subcommand

An **object** subcommand that shall provide information about a particular
object. Its first argument shall be the name of an object to get information
about, its second argument shall be a subsubcommand indicating the type of
information to retrieve and all subsequent arguments shall be arguments, as
appropriate. The following types of information shall be available:

 class: Returns the class of an object, or if _className_ is specified,
   whether the object is \(directly or indirectly through inheritance or mixin\)
   an instance of the named class.

 > **info object class** _object_ ?_className_?

 definition: Returns the formal argument list and body used to define a
   method.

 > **info object definition** _object method_

 filters: Returns the list of filters defined for an object.

 > **info object filters** _object_

 forward: Returns the list of words that form the command prefix that a
   method is forwarded to.

 > **info object forward** _object method_

 isa: Returns boolean information about how an object relates to the class
   hierarchy. Supports a range of subcommands to allow the specification of
   what sort of test is to be performed:

 > class: Returns whether the named object is a class.

 > > **info object isa class** _object_

 > metaclass: Returns whether the named object is a class that can create
   other classes \(i.e. is **oo::class** or one of its subclasses\).

 > > **info object isa metaclass** _object_

 > mixin: Returns whether the named object has _mixinClassName_ as one of
     its mixins.

 > > **info object isa mixin** _object mixinClassName_

 > object: Returns whether _object_ really names an object.

 > > **info object isa object** _object_

 > typeof: Returns whether the object is of type _class_ \(i.e. an instance
     of that class or an instance of a subclass of that class\).

 > > **info object isa typeof** _object class_

 methods: Returns the list of methods defined for an object. Supports the
     options **-all** to also look at the class hierarchy for the object,
     and **-private** to get the list of methods supported by **my** for
     the object.

 > **info object methods** _object options_

 mixins: Returns the list of mixins for an object.

 > **info object mixins** _object_

 vars: Returns the list of all variables defined within the object, or
   optionally just those that match _pattern_ according to the rules of
   **string match**.

 > **info object vars** _object_ ?_pattern_?

## An [info class] Subcommand

A **class** subcommand that shall provide information about a particular
class. Its first argument shall be the name of a class to get information
about, its second argument shall be a subsubcommand indicating the type of
information to retrieve and all subsequent arguments shall be arguments, as
appropriate. The following types of information shall be available:

 constructor: Returns the formal argument list and body used to define the
   constructor, or an empty list if no constructor is present.

 > **info class constructor** _class_

 definition: Returns the formal argument list and body used to define a
   method.

 > **info class definition** _class method_

 destructor: Returns the body of the destructor, or an empty string if no
   destructor is present.

 > **info class destructor** _class_

 filters: Returns the list of filters defined for a class.

 > **info class filters** _class_

 forward: Returns the list of words that form the command prefix that a
   method is forwarded to.

 > **info class forward** _class method_

 instances: Returns a list of all direct instances of the class \(but not
   instances of any subclasses of the class\), or optionally just those that
   match _pattern_ according to the rules of **string match**.

 > **info class instances** _class_ ?_pattern_?

 methods: Returns the list of methods defined by a class. Supports the options
     **-all** to also look at the class hierarchy, and **-private** to get
     the list of methods supported by **my** for the object's instances.

 > **info class methods** _class options_

 subclasses: Returns a list of all subclasses of the class, or optionally just
   those that match _pattern_ according to the rules of **string match**.

 > **info class subclasses** _class_ ?_pattern_?

 superclasses: Returns a list of all superclasses of the named class in the
   class hierarchy. The list will be ordered in inheritance-precedence order.

 > **info class superclasses** _class_

## Extending the Introspection Capabilities

Other forms of introspection subcommands may be added to **info object** and
**info class** by creating exported commands in the namespaces
**oo::InfoObject** and **oo::InfoClass** respectively.

## Issues with Objects and Namespaces

Every object has a distinct namespace associated with it, the name of which is
outside the scope of this specification. It is the name of this namespace that
is returned by **self namespace**.

The namespace does have a path set, as if by calling **namespace path**;
this is how the **next** and **self** commands are provided, though since
they are never usable outside the scope of the body of a method, the namespace
which they originate from is out of the scope of this specification.

The **my** command is the only command in the object's namespace by default
\(i.e., this command is truly per-object\). It is not exported from the object's
namespace, nor are any other commands exported from or imported into the
namespace.

Methods are not commands, and so completely ignore the **namespace export**
command, nor does **namespace unknown** get involved at any point during the
location of a method. \(They may run during the processing of a method body; it
is a context very similar to a normal procedure body.\) Similarly, a method may
not be **namespace import**ed from another namespace.

Each method \(including both the constructor and destructor\) executed by an
object executes in that object's namespace. Changes made by a method to the
namespace \(including both command declaration and uses of **namespace
import**\) will be seen by all other methods invoked on the same object. Note
that methods declared by classes still execute in the instance objects'
namespaces.

# C API

_Note: This API is probably incomplete. Future TIPs may extend or completely
revise it._

## Datatypes

The following public datatypes shall be declared in tcl.h:

 Tcl\_Object: An opaque handle to an object.

 Tcl\_Class: An opaque handle to a class.

 Tcl\_Method: An opaque handle to a method.

 Tcl\_ObjectContext: An opaque handle to an object method call context.

 Tcl\_MethodType: A structure describing the type of a method implementation.
   It shall have the following fields:

 > version: The version number of the structure, which should always be
   referred to as TCL\_OO\_METHOD\_VERSION\_CURRENT in source code \(currently
   ignored, but allows transparent versioning in the future\).

 > name: The name of the method type, for debugging.

 > callProc: A pointer to a function that defines how to call method
   implementations of this type. Must not be NULL.

 > deleteProc: A pointer to a function that defines how to delete the
   _clientData_ associated with a particular method implementation instance.
   If NULL, no deletion of the _clientData_ is required.

 > cloneProc: A pointer to a function that defines how to copy the
   _clientData_ associated with a particular method implementation instance
   during the copying of an object or class with **oo::copy**. If NULL, the
   method will be cloned by just copying the _clientData_.

 Tcl\_ObjectMetadataType: A structure describing the type of some arbitrary
   non-NULL metadata attached to an object or class. It shall have the
   following fields:

 > version: The version number of the structure, which should always be
   referred to as TCL\_OO\_METADATA\_VERSION\_CURRENT in source code \(currently
   ignored, but allows for transparent versioning in the future\).

 > name: The name of the metadata type, for debugging.

 > deleteProc: A pointer to a function that defines how to delete some
   metadata associated with this type. Must not be NULL.

 > cloneProc: A pointer to a function that defines how to copy some metadata
   associated with this type during the copying of an object or class with
   **oo::copy**. If NULL, the metadata will not be copied. \(_Open issue:_
   There is a use case for making objects unclonable; consider the
   case where the metadata consists of one or more OS resource handles.
   Simply shallow-copying resource handles is a bad idea, but
   deep-copying them may well be infeasible. Not all objects can
   handle copy-on-write semantics gracefully.\)

 Tcl\_MethodCallProc: The type of the _callProc_ field of the Tcl\_MethodType
   structure. It is a pointer to a function that is used to implement how a
   method implementation is called. It takes five arguments and returns a
   normal Tcl result code. The arguments are:

 > clientData: Some method implementation instance specific data. Note that
   this is specific to the instance of the method implementation, and not
   \(necessarily\) the instance of the object.

 > interp: The Tcl interpreter reference.

 > objectContext: The object method call context, through which useful
   information \(such as what object this method was invoked upon\) can be
   obtained.

 > objc: The number of arguments.

 > objv: The actual list of arguments. Since the number of arguments required
   to indicate the method may vary, the method implementation should look up
   how many to skip over using the object method call context.

 Tcl\_MethodDeleteProc: The type of the _deleteProc_ field of the
   Tcl\_MethodType structure. It is a pointer to a function that is used to
   delete _clientData_ values associated with a method instance. It takes a
   single argument \(the _clientData_ to delete\) and has no return value.

 Tcl\_MethodCloneProc: The type of the _cloneProc_ field of the
   Tcl\_MethodType structure. It is a pointer to a function that is used to
   make copies of _clientData_ values associated with a method instance
   suitable for use in another method instance. It takes two arguments \(the
   _clientData_ to clone, and a pointer to a variable into which to write
   the cloned _clientData_\) and returns either TCL\_OK or TCL\_ERROR, with the
   method only being cloned if the result is TCL\_OK \(the method is silently
   not cloned otherwise\).

 Tcl\_ObjectMapMethodNameProc: The type of a callback function used to adjust
   the mapping of objects and method names to implementations, which is
   required to support building [incr Tcl] on top of the core OO system. It
   takes four arguments, being the interpreter, the object that the method is
   being invoked upon, a point to a variable to contain the class in the
   hierarchy to start the search for components of the method chain from, and
   an unshared object holding the method name as supplied and which can be
   modified if the method to look for is not the literal name passed in.

 > This is necessary because [incr Tcl] allows the invoking of superclass
   implementations of a method using a syntax like
   "_superclassName_::_methodName_" where _superclassName_ may name any
   superclass of the current class, and _methodName_ may be any method
   name.

 > Note that the exact definition of this type is subject to change at the
   moment in order to ensure that it can be connected to the method dispatch
   engine efficiently. The type will be finalized before the release of Tcl
   8.6.

 Tcl\_ObjectMetadataDeleteProc: The type of the _deleteProc_ field of the
   Tcl\_ObjectMetadataType structure. It is a pointer to a function that is
   used to delete _metadata_ values attached to an object or a class. It
   takes a single argument \(the _metadata_ to delete\) and has no return
   value.

 Tcl\_ObjectMetadataCloneProc: The type of the _cloneProc_ field of the
   Tcl\_ObjectMetadataType structure. It is a pointer to a function that is
   used to create a copy of _metadata_ values attached to an object or a
   class. It takes three argument, \(the interpreter, the _metadata_ to copy,
   and a pointer to a variable into which to write the copy, or NULL if the
   copy is not to be performed\) and returns a standard Tcl result code.

## Functions

The following functional operations are defined:

 Tcl\_NewMethod: This function creates a new method on a class \(and hence
   on all instances of that class\). It has the following signature:

 > Tcl\_Method **Tcl\_NewMethod**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Class
   _cls_, Tcl\_Obj \*_nameObj_, int _isPublic_, const Tcl\_MethodType
   *_typePtr_, ClientData _clientData_\)

	 > If the method is created with a NULL _nameObj_, it must be installed
   manually into the class as a constructor or destructor \(in the latter case,
   it is important that the method be able to execute without additional
   arguments\). Note that a NULL _typePtr_ is reserved for internal use.

 Tcl\_ClassSetConstructor: This function installs a method into a class as a
   constructor for instances of that class. The method must have been created
   with **Tcl\_NewMethod** with a NULL _nameObj_ argument. It has the
   following signature:

	 > void **Tcl\_ClassSetConstructor**\(Tcl\_Class _cls_, Tcl\_Method
   _method_\)

 Tcl\_ClassSetDestructor: This function installs a method into a class as a
   destructor for instances of that class. The method must have been created
   with **Tcl\_NewMethod** with a NULL _nameObj_ argument. It has the
   following signature:

	 > void **Tcl\_ClassSetConstructor**\(Tcl\_Class _cls_, Tcl\_Method
   _method_\)

 Tcl\_NewInstanceMethod: This function creates a new method on an object. It
   has the following signature:

	 > Tcl\_Method **Tcl\_NewInstanceMethod**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Object
   _object_, Tcl\_Obj \*_nameObj_, int _isPublic_, const Tcl\_MethodType
   *_typePtr_, ClientData _clientData_\)

	 > Note that a NULL _typePtr_ is reserved for internal use, and _nameObj_
   must not be NULL.

 Tcl\_NewObjectInstance: This function creates a new instance of a class,
   calling any defined constructors. It has the following signature, returning
   NULL \(and setting a message in the interpreter\) if the object creation
   failed:

	 > Tcl\_Object **Tcl\_NewObjectInstance**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Class
   _cls_, const char \*_name_, const char \*_nsName_, int _objc_,
   Tcl\_Obj \*const \*_objv_, int _skip_\)

	 > Both _name_ and _nsName_ may be NULL, in which case the constructor
   code picks a default that doesn't clash with any previously existing
   commands or namespaces.

 Tcl\_CopyObjectInstance: This function creates a copy of an object \(including
   classes\) without copying the backing namespace or executing any
   constructors. It has the following signature, returning NULL \(and setting a
   message in the interpreter\) if the object copying failed:

	 > Tcl\_Object **Tcl\_CopyObjectInstance**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Object
   _sourceObject_, const char \*_targetName_\)

	 > Note that the copying of an object can fail if the copy code for one of the
   metadata coping functions fails, so those functions can veto copying. Also
   note that if _targetName_ is NULL, a name will be picked for the object.
   Currently no control over the naming of the target object's namespace is
   provided.

 Tcl\_GetObjectFromObj: This function converts from a Tcl\_Obj holding the name
   of an object to a Tcl\_Object handle. It returns NULL \(leaving an error
   message in the interpreter\) if the conversion fails.

	 > Tcl\_Object **Tcl\_GetObjectFromObj**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Obj
   *_objPtr_\)

 Tcl\_ObjectContextInvokeNext: This function invokes the next method
   implementation in a method call chain, and is the internal implementation
   of the **next** command. It has the following signature:

	 > int **Tcl\_ObjectContextInvokeNext**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_,
   Tcl\_ObjectContext _context_, int _objc_, Tcl\_Obj \*const \*_objv_, int
   _skip_\)

 Tcl\_ClassGetMetadata: This function retrieves the metadata attached to the
   class _cls_ that is associated with the type _typePtr_. It returns NULL
   if no data of that type is attached.

	 > ClientData **Tcl\_ClassGetMetadata**\(Tcl\_Class _cls_, const
   Tcl\_ObjectMetadataType \*_typePtr_\)

 Tcl\_ClassSetMetadata: This function attaches metadata, _metadata_, of a
   specific type, _typePtr_, to the class, _clazz_, or removes the
   metadata of that type if _metadata_ is NULL. It is a no-op to remove
   metadata of a type that is not attached in the first place.

	 > void **Tcl\_ClassSetMetadata**\(Tcl\_Class _clazz_, const
   Tcl\_ObjectMetadataType \*_typePtr_, ClientData _metadata_\)

 Tcl\_ObjectGetMetadata: This function retrieves the metadata attached to the
   object _object_ that is associated with the type _typePtr_. It returns
   NULL if no data of that type is attached.

	 > ClientData **Tcl\_ObjectGetMetadata**\(Tcl\_Object _object_, const
   Tcl\_ObjectMetadataType \*_typePtr_\)

 Tcl\_ObjectSetMetadata: This function attaches metadata, _metadata_, of a
   specific type, _typePtr_, to the object, _object_, or removes the
   metadata of that type if _metadata_ is NULL. It is a no-op to remove
   metadata of a type that is not attached in the first place.

	 > void **Tcl\_ObjectSetMetadata**\(Tcl\_Object _object_, const
   Tcl\_ObjectMetadataType \*_typePtr_, ClientData _metadata_\)

 Tcl\_ObjectGetMethodNameMapper: This function retrieves the current method
   name mapping function for an object, or NULL if none was set. It has the
   following signature:

	 > Tcl\_ObjectMapMethodNameProc **Tcl\_ObjectGetMethodNameMapper**\(Tcl\_Object
   _object_\)

 Tcl\_ObjectSetMethodNameMapper: This functionsets the method name mapping
   function for an object, or removes it if the function is set to NULL. It
   has the following signature:

	 > void **Tcl\_ObjectSetMethodNameMapper**\(Tcl\_Object _object_,
   Tcl\_ObjectMapMethodNameProc _methodNameMapper_\)

The following pure inspective \(i.e., non-state changing\) operations are
defined:

 Tcl\_GetClassAsObject: This gets the object that represents a class.

 > Tcl\_Object **Tcl\_GetClassAsObject**\(Tcl\_Class _clazz_\)

 Tcl\_GetObjectAsClass: This gets the class that an object represents \(or NULL
   if the object does not represent a class\).

 > Tcl\_Class **Tcl\_GetObjectAsClass**\(Tcl\_Object _object_\)

 Tcl\_GetObjectCommand: This gets the command for an object. It is the name of
   this command that represents the object at the script level, and as such,
   it may be renamed.

 > Tcl\_Command **Tcl\_GetObjectCommand**\(Tcl\_Object _object_\)

 Tcl\_GetObjectNamespace: This gets the object's private namespace.

 > Tcl\_Namespace \***Tcl\_GetObjectNamespace**\(Tcl\_Object _object_\)

 Tcl\_MethodDeclarerClass: This gets the class that declared a method, or NULL
   if the method is a per-object method.

 > Tcl\_Class **Tcl\_MethodDeclarerClass**\(Tcl\_Method _method_\)

 Tcl\_MethodDeclarerObject: This gets the object that declared a method, or
   NULL if the method is a class method.

 > Tcl\_Object **Tcl\_MethodDeclarerObject**\(Tcl\_Method _method_\)

 Tcl\_MethodIsPublic: This returns whether a method is a public method. This
   status might be overridden in subclasses or objects.

 > int **Tcl\_MethodIsPublic**\(Tcl\_Method _method_\)

 Tcl\_MethodIsType: This returns whether a method is a specific type of
   method, and if so, also returns the _clientData_ for the type. No way of
   inspecting method types for which you do not have a pointer to the type
   structure is provided.

 > int **Tcl\_MethodIsType**\(Tcl\_Method _method_, const Tcl\_MethodType
   *_typePtr_, ClientData \*_clientDataPtr_\)

 Tcl\_MethodName: This returns the name of a method.

	 > Tcl\_Obj \***Tcl\_MethodName**\(Tcl\_Method _method_\)

 Tcl\_ObjectDeleted: This returns whether an object has been deleted \(assuming
   deletion has not yet completed, i.e., that the destructor is currently
   being processed\).

	 > int **Tcl\_ObjectDeleted**\(Tcl\_Object _object_\)

 Tcl\_ObjectContextIsFiltering: This returns whether the method call context is
   working with a filter or not.

	 > int **Tcl\_ObjectContextIsFiltering**\(Tcl\_ObjectContext _context_\)

 Tcl\_ObjectContextMethod: This returns the method call context's current
   method instance.

	 > Tcl\_Method **Tcl\_ObjectContextMethod**\(Tcl\_ObjectContext _context_\)

 Tcl\_ObjectContextObject: This returns the method call context's object \(i.e.,
   the object which was invoked\).

	 > Tcl\_Object **Tcl\_ObjectContextObject**\(Tcl\_ObjectContext _context_\)

 Tcl\_ObjectContextSkippedArgs: This returns the number of arguments to be
   skipped \(this varies because the method instance may be invoked through
   either [obj method ...] or through [next ...]\).

	 > int **Tcl\_ObjectContextSkippedArgs**\(Tcl\_ObjectContext _context_\)

# Not Addressed in this Document

This TIP does not address the reqirements for management of variables on a
class level or for "class methods" \(in the Java sense\). These will need to be
the subject of future TIPs.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

----

The following sections are non-normative.

# Appendix: Class Hierarchy for Support of Other OO Systems

When using the OO system as a basis for some other object system, it is useful
for all classes and objects to derive from some other object root for
compatability with existing practice. To see how to do this, consider this
class hierarchy \(targetted at XOTcl\) outlined below. The XOTcl _Object_
class would derive from the core **oo::object** class, and the XOTcl
_Class_ class would derive from the core **oo::class** and the XOTcl
_Object_ classes. This would give the following diagram \(core classes are in
lower case with their namespace omitted, XOTcl classes are in upper case, with
namespace omitted\).

	                     +--------+
	            ,------->| object |
	            |        +--------+
	            |            ,^.
	    creates |       ______|______
	            |      |             |
	            |  +-------+    +--------+
	            `--| class |    | Object |<-.
	               +-------+    +--------+  |
	                  ,^.           ,^.     |
	                   |______ ______|      | creates
	                          |             |
	                      +-------+         |
	                      | Class |---------'
	                      +-------+

Note that **class** instances create **object**s \(or subclasses thereof\),
but _Class_ instances create _Object_s \(or subclasses thereof\).

# Appendix: XOTcl Features Omitted from the Core OO System

## Object Methods

 Object::autoname: This is trivially implemented in a small procedure, and
   core objects can pick names for themselves and are renameable.

 Object::check: Preconditions and postconditions are not supported \(they add a
   lot of complexity\) and neither are invariants. Hence, there is no need to
   control whether they are executed.

 Object::cleanup: This is not an especially well-defined method \(what if the
   object happens to hold handles to complex resources such as network
   sockets; it is not generally possible for the state of the remote server to
   be reset\) and can be added in any compatability layer.

 Object::configure: This feature has been deliberately omitted from the core
   object system. This would be value added by any XOTcl extension.

 Object::extractConfigureArg: This feature is part of **configure**.

 Object::getExitHandler: This feature is not necessary for this version. If it
   existed, it would not need to be a part of the base object.

 Object::info: The introspection features are moved into the core **info**
   command.

 Object::invar: Invariants may be implemented using filters.

 Object::move: This feature is equivalent to the use of the standard
   **rename** operation.

 Object::noinit: This feature has been deliberately omitted from the core
   object system because its use is dependent on the use of other
   deliberately-omitted features \(i.e., **configure**\). This would be value
   added by any XOTcl extension.

 Object::parameter and Object::parametercmd: The core object system provides
   tools for doing parameters, but does not provide an implementation on the
   grounds that it is pretty easy to add.

 Object::requireNamespace: Objects always have a namespace.

 Object::setExitHandler: See the comments for **getExitHandler** above.

## Class Methods

 Class::\_\_unknown: Auto-loading of unknown classes is handled by the standard
   core **unknown** mechanism.

 Class::abstract: Abstractness is relatively easy to implement on top of the
   proposed infrastructure and is not critical to getting an implementation.

 Class::allinstances: This feature is trivially implemented in a small
   procedure.

 Class::alloc: The core objects have no default behaviour, so the difference
   with the basic core class behaviour is moot.

 Class::create: Core object creation is a much more sealed process, but the
   lack of **configure**-like behaviour means that the complexity of this
   method is not necessary. Instead, constructors are called automatically.

 Class::parameterclass: Core object system parameters are not implemented by
   classes.

 Class::volatile: This feature is omitted as it is believed that it is
   possible to implement automated lifecycle management as a mixin.

## Other Commands

 getExitHandler, setExitHandler: Exit handlers are out of scope for the core
   object system.

