# TIP 262: Background Images for Frames
	Author:         Eric Taylor <et2@rocketship1.com>
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        18-Mar-2006
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tk,option
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tk-Branch:      tip-262
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes an option for frames that allows users to set the
background of the window to be an image.

# Rationale

Just a there is an **-image** option for **button** widgets, this
TIP suggests that a **-backgroundimage** option for frames be
implemented. The image should be either an entire single image, or a
smaller image that would be tiled, with a **-tile** option. Tiling
would repeat, as needed, a smaller image to fit the visible area of
the frame.

If the image was tiled, then it should be re-tiled as needed during a
resize. The image would reside behind any other decoration or other
widgets that resided in the frame. The image should be re-configurable
to replace the image and/or remove it, as with a button image.

This TIP should allow some rather classy looking tcl/tk programs to be
created with much ease.

# Proposed Change

Two new options are proposed for **frame** widgets, to be
manipulated using the normal **configure** and **cget** methods:

 * **-backgroundimage** _imageName_ - This gives the name of an
   image \(as created by **image create**\) that is to be painted onto
   the widget immediately after the painting of the solid background
   colour. If _imageName_ is the empty string \(the default\) no image
   will be painted. The painting of the image will be controlled by
   the **-tile** option.

 * **-tile** _boolean_ - If this option gives _boolean_ as true,
   the image will be painted such that the top-left corner corresponds
   to the top-left corner of the frame, and then subsequently
   repeatedly painted \(with no gaps between the areas painted\) to the
   right and below that initial painting until such time as the entire
   widget is covered by copies of the image. If this option gives
   _boolean_ as false, the image will only be painted once, such
   that the center of the image painted is coincident with the center
   of the frame widget.

# Implementation

See the [tip-262 branch](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/timeline?r=tip-262).

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

