# TIP 263: Quantum Tcl
	Author:		Lars Hellström <Lars.Hellstrom@residenset.net>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Pending
	Tcl-Version:	9.2
	Created:	01-Apr-2006
	Post-History:	
-----

# Abstract

A new Tcl command **qubit** is proposed. This command makes it possible to
handle quantum information in the form of qubits.

# Rationale

As stated in [[131]](131.md), what Tcl needs in order to succeed in the marketplace is a
feature that no other programming language provides, a "killer app" as it
were. The Tk toolkit, Expect, cross-platform portability, starkits, tkcon, and
excellent embed/extend-ability with respect to other languages are all well
and good, but they have clearly failed to push Tcl usage to the point of
having critical mass.  The **qubit** command makes it possible to achieve an
exponential speedup for important problems and should therefore provide a
powerful enough incentive that even Perl programmers would be compelled to
switch languages.

# Background

Quantum computing makes use of phenomena in quantum mechanics to, at each time
step, carry out an exponential amount of work using only a linear amount of
hardware. The way this maps onto physical reality is pretty mind-boggling, but
for the programmer it is sufficient to think of the Quantum Processing Unit
\(QPU\) as an extremely powerful but somewhat specialised coprocessor and leave
it at that. \(Chances are anyway that the QPU isn't physically located in your
desktop computer, as they tend to involve lots of lasers, magnets, vacuum
chambers, liquid nitrogen cooling, etc.\)

Quantum information display an interesting duality in that it is analog during
a computation, but becomes digital as soon as one measures it. \(Wave/particle
duality, in case anyone came to think of that, is the kind of "mapping onto
physical reality" issue that will not be treated here.\) This makes the design
of quantum algorithms somewhat different from the design of classical
algorithms, in a manner similar to that in which the design of analog
electronic circuits is different from the design of digital electronic
circuits, as one must often work out the numbers rather than rely on a
discrete case-by-case analysis. Another curious feature is that all fully
quantum operations must be reversible, which in particular has the effect that
quantum information can neither be duplicated nor \(in the absence of
measurements\) destroyed, only rearranged. There is in particular no quantum
analogue to assignments such as [set a $b], since not only need this copy
the value of b, it also irrecoverably destroys the old value of a; the closest
one gets to such an assignment is exchanging the values of a and b.

For more information on quantum computing in general, see e.g.:

   * Wikipedia article "Quantum computer"
     <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_computer> .

   * J. Gruska: Quantum Computing \(1999\), ISBN 0-07-709503-0,
     <http://www.fi.muni.cz/usr/gruska/quantum/> .

# Specification

The quantum computing model supported by the **qubit** command is that of
_quantum bits_ \(more commonly called _qubits_\) and _quantum boolean
circuits_. While other more fancy models such as "Quantum Turing Machines"
exist, this is generally considered to be the most realistic model, and it is
also the one most closely related to the number-of-gates complexity measure
for classical computing. Should it in the future prove desirable to support
also some other model, then one may do so through a separate command.

In this model, a quantum state of N qubits is completely specified by a set of
2\*\*N complex numbers, usually known as _probability amplitudes_ \(they are
not probabilities as such, but they do completely determine the probabilities
for various events\). Many different bases are possible, but in the standard
\(also known as the computational\) basis each of these amplitudes corresponds
to a particular assignment of 0s and 1s to the qubits. Operations on a quantum
state can be understood as operations on the vector of amplitudes.

The **qubit** command has the five subcommands.

## The 'new' Subcommand

 > **qubit new** ?_-option value_ ?...??

Allocate/create a new qubit, and return a handle for the new qubit that
identifies it in subsequent operations, or throw an error if
allocation/creation failed \(possible causes include, but are not limited to,
lack of resources on the hardware side and user having insufficient
permissions\). New qubits are not entangled with any of the old ones, but their
state is otherwise unspecified.

The options are meant as a means for supplying extra information about the new
qubit, such as for example whether it is being protected from decoherence by a
scheme of quantum error correction codes \(the Tcl core can easily implement
such features on platforms where the C level APIs only provide raw qubits\);
however at present no options are defined.

## The 'operate' Subcommand

 > **qubit operate** _gate id0_ ?_id1_ ?...??

Perform a quantum operation \(the _gate_\) on one or more qubits \(specified
using the handles _id0_, _id1_, etc.\). Returns the operation actually
applied.

In the interest of generality, gates are specified as unitary matrices \(this
is a universal representation for quantum gates\), or more concretely as lists
of lists of lists of doubles. The innermost lists must have length 2 and
encode the real \(index 0\) and imaginary \(index 1\) parts of an element of the
matrix. Indices in the middle list level select a column and indices in the
outer list level consequently a row. Put another way,

	 lindex $gate $i $j 0 ; # Returns Re gate(i,j)
	 lindex $gate $i $j 1 ; # Returns Im gate(i,j)

The row/column index corresponding to the _id0_ qubit having value $r0, the
_id1_ qubit having value $r1, etc. is $r0\*\(2\*\*0\) \+ $r1\*\(2\*\*1\) \+ ... A
_gate_ for operating on _n_ qubits must thus have side 2\*\*_n_. Columns
correspond to qubit states before the operation and rows correspond to qubit
states after the operation.

An error is thrown if the number of qubit arguments does not match the side of
the _gate_ matrix, if not all _idN_ arguments are qubit handles, if some
qubit occurs twice in the list, and if _gate_ is not a proper matrix \(too
many or too few elements in some list, elements not recognised as doubles,
etc.\).

An error is _not_ thrown if the _gate_ is not unitary. In general the
operation actually applied has to be supported by the available hardware, so
the **qubit operate** command \(or some lower level interface\) should
determine which supported operation most closely approximates the specified
_gate_ and apply that instead. The user can check what was done \(up to
numeric precision\) by inspecting the return value. Using a return value from
**qubit operate** as the _gate_ for another call should result in the
exact same operation being carried out.

## The 'measure' Subcommand

 > **qubit measure** _id_

Measures a qubit with respect to the standard basis. Returns 0 or 1 depending
on the resulting state.

_Note_ that measuring a qubit changes the quantum state to one in which that
qubit has a pure value. If other qubits are initially entangled with the one
being measured, then these will also be affected by this operation. Measuring
a qubit causes it to be disentangled from all other qubits \(or perhaps
entangles the state of the entire universe with the qubit, depending on your
philosophical point of view\).

## The 'dispose' Subcommand

 > **qubit dispose** _id_

Frees/deallocates a qubit, returning it to whatever pool of resources **qubit
new** got it from, but before doing that the qubit is measured to safely
disentangle it from any remaining qubits. The return value is 0 or 1 as for
the corresponding **qubit measure**.

## The 'names' Subcommand

 > **qubit names**

This is an instrospection command. It returns a list of all qubit handles
currently available in this interpreter.

## Future Expansion

Other subcommands may be added in the future, but this set is complete for
single interpreter algorithms.

# Examples

The syntax of **qubit operate** was chosen to facilitate the creation of
aliases for common gates, as this should make programs more readable. An alias
for the CNOT \(conditional not\) gate can be created as

	 interp alias {} CNOT {} qubit operate {
	    { {1 0} {0 0} {0 0} {0 0} }
	    { {0 0} {0 0} {0 0} {1 0} }
	    { {0 0} {0 0} {1 0} {0 0} }
	    { {0 0} {1 0} {0 0} {0 0} }
	 }

after which one can use the command

	 CNOT $control $target

The more significant $target qubit is negated if the $control qubit is 1 but
left alone otherwise.

Another standard gate is the Hadamard gate, which can be defined as follows.

	 set rsqrt2 [list [expr {1/sqrt(2)}] 0] ; # Reciprocal square root of  2.
	 interp alias {} Hadamard {} qubit operate [
	   list [list $rsqrt2 $rsqrt2] [list $rsqrt2 [list [expr -sqrt(0.5)]  0]]
	 ]

The Hadamard gate is used to create states that are uniform superpositions of
0s and 1s. A simple application of that is the following random bit generator.

		 proc randombit {} {
		     set id [qubit new]        ; # Allocate qubit
		     qubit measure $id         ; # Make pure 0 or pure 1
		     Hadamard $id              ; # Make an equal mix of 0 and 1
		     return [qubit dispose $id]; # Measure and clean up
		 }

Note that this \(provided, of course, that one believes in the standard
interpretation of quantum mechanics\) is not a psuedo-random bit generator, but
a truly random bit generator. Even if the Hadamard gate would be slightly off
\(unlikely, as this is a very standard gate, but possible\) this would not
affect the essential randomness of the bits produced, but only the exact
probability.

A third type of elementary gate is the phase shift gate, which changes the
phase \(but not the size\) of some probability amplitude. To change the phase of
the 1 amplitude of a qubit $id by the angle $phi, one would use the command

	 qubit operate [list {{1.0 0.0} {0.0 0.0}} [list {0.0 0.0} [
	     list [expr {cos($phi)}] [expr {sin($phi)}]
	 ]]] $id

Phase changes do not change the probability distribution for any qubit
measurement, but they do affect the state in ways that can lead to different
probabilities further on, and thus illustrate the fact that there is more to a
quantum state than the probability distribution it gives rise to here and
now. As a concrete example of this, assuming $id is a qubit, and with aliases
as above, the script:

	 set before [qubit measure $id]
	 Hadamard $id
	 Hadamard $id
	 set after [qubit measure $id]
	 expr {$before == $after}

will with probability 1 produce the result 1, whereas the script:

	 set before [qubit measure $id]
	 Hadamard $id
	 qubit operate {{{1 0} {0 0}} {{0 0} {-1 0}}} $id
	 Hadamard $id
	 set after [qubit measure $id]
	 expr {$before == $after}

will with probability 1 produce the result 0. The only difference is the 180
degrees phase shift of the 1 amplitude in the explicit **qubit operate**
command, which transforms one state with equal probabilities for 0 and 1 to
another state with equal probabilities for 0 and 1!

# Rejected Alternatives

One might expect that a truly Quantum Tcl would keep quantum information as
"first class data", i.e., in Tcl\_Objs to be passed around by value rather than
as qubits that can only be passed around by name, but that is impossible
\(unless one goes to such lengths as to run the entire Tcl process in a QPU,
which again will probably never be possible\) due to a fundamental
incompatibility between the laws of quantum mechanics and Tcl's Everything Is
A String principle.

Beginning with the EIAS side, one may observe that for a quantum state to be
encodable into a Tcl\_Obj, it must be serializable - there must be a way of
generating a string that completely encodes the state. Since quantum mechanics
does not permit extracting that much information about a quantum state, there
are only two options: either everything is kept within the QPU \(not
realistic\), or nothing is kept in the QPU. In the latter case, one loses
entirely the advantage of quantum computation, so it is rather pointless.

On the quantum side, one may observe that most of the things that are
routinely done to Tcl\_Objs are simply impossible to do to quantum information.
The fundamental problem here is that Tcl\_Objs must be duplicatable, whereas it
is a theorem in quantum mechanics that quantum states cannot be duplicated
\(the "No cloning" theorem\). Somewhat related is the problem that quantum
information can only be read \(used as input to some operation\) once, whereas a
Tcl\_Obj can be written once but read an unlimited number of times.

# Security Implications

As the **qubit** command only manipulates data and cannot be used for any
form of communication, it may in principle be made available also in safe
interpreters. However since **qubit new** seizes a global resource that can
be expected to be in limited supply on a system, it is probably better to be
safe than sorry, and therefore the **qubit** command shall initially be
hidden in a safe interpreter.

Omitting the command entirely and instead alias all qubit operations to the
**qubit** command of the parent interpreter is _not_ a good idea, as the
quick \(but sloppy\) implementation of this would allow untrusted code evaluated
in the safe interpreter access also to the qubits of the parent.

It should be noted that the easy access to quantum computing that this command
provides would have significant implications for the security of many external
systems. Such issues are outside the scope of this TIP.

# Future Extensions

Besides quantum algorithms, many interesting applications of quantum
information processing involves communication through the means of a quantum
state shared by different parties. While fast long distance qubit
transportation is physically made possible by means of quantum teleportation
\(which really isn't as fancy as it sounds - basically it amounts to a
combination of the old TV chef trick of having prepared something in advance,
in this case physically transferring a qubit, and the patchfile trick of only
transmitting a diff against what was physically distributed\), there are
currently no standardised protocols for this, and until the time that there is
there probably isn't much point in specifying some **qubit socket** command
for Tcl either. It may however be observed that _non-open_ commercial
systems <http://www.magiqtech.com/>  transmitting quantum information over long
distances are available today.

While transferring qubits between different machines obviously present some
technical problems, it may seem that transferring qubits between different
interpreters in the same process should at least be straightforward, but the
presence of multiple threads in the process introduce complications also for
this case. Concretely, transferring a qubit from one thread to another will in
general cause these threads to become entangled! In order to not make thread
maintenance even more complicated by introducing the concept of quantum
deadlock due to thread tangles, this TIP does not treat the subject of a
mechanism for transferring qubits between interpreters.

# Reference Implementation

A Tcl level emulation of the **qubit** command \(minus some error checking,
but also not requiring a QPU\) is available as SF patch no 1462755
<http://sf.net/tracker/?func=detail&aid=1462755&group_id=10894&atid=310894> .
This emulation uses the standard Tcl rand\(\) function for generating random
numbers, so it is not cryptographically safe. Also note that it internally
uses of some tcllib packages, which must therefore be available.

No C implementation exists at present, but creating one is a simple matter of
programming \(SMOP\). In particular, since the details of the command
implementations for the foreseeable future almost surely will have some
dependence on the particular hardware present, it seems appropriate to assign
to each subcommand an entry in the internal stubs table and then simply have
the main _Tcl\_QubitObjCmd_ call each as appropriate.

	   int
	   Tcl_QubitObjCmd(
	       ClientData clientData,      /* Might be used. */
	       Tcl_Interp *interp,         /* Current interpreter. */
	       int objc,                   /* Number of arguments. */
	       Tcl_Obj *CONST objv[])      /* Argument objects. */
	   {
	       int index;
	       static CONST char *options[] = {
	           "dispose",     "measure",     "names",
	           "new",         "operate",     (char *) NULL
	       };
	       enum options {
	           QUBIT_DISPOSE, QUBIT_MEASURE, QUBIT_NAMES,
	           QUBIT_NEW,     QUBIT_OPERATE
	       };
	
	       if (objc < 2) {
	           Tcl_WrongNumArgs(interp, 1, objv, "subcmd ?arg ...?");
	           return TCL_ERROR;
	       }
	
	       if (Tcl_GetIndexFromObj(interp, objv[1], options, "subcommand",  0,
	               &index) != TCL_OK) {
	           return TCL_ERROR;
	       }
	
	       switch ((enum options) index) {
	       case QUBIT_DISPOSE:
	           return TclQubitDisposeObjCmd(clientData, interp, objc,  objv);
	       case QUBIT_MEASURE:
	           return TclQubitMeasureObjCmd(clientData, interp, objc,  objv);
	       case QUBIT_NAMES:
	           return TclQubitNamesObjCmd(clientData, interp, objc, objv);
	       case QUBIT_NEW:
	           return TclQubitNewObjCmd(clientData, interp, objc, objv);
	       case QUBIT_OPERATE:
	           return TclQubitOperateObjCmd(clientData, interp, objc,  objv);
	       }
	
	       /*
	        * We won't get this far.
	        */
	
	       Tcl_Panic("unhandled subcommand");
	       return TCL_ERROR;
	   }

A fallback definition of _TclQubitNewObjCmd_ that can be used when Tcl is
compiled without hardware QPU support is:

	   int
	   TclQubitNewObjCmd(
	       ClientData dummy,           /* Not used. */
	       Tcl_Interp *interp,         /* Current interpreter. */
	       int objc,                   /* Number of arguments. */
	       Tcl_Obj *CONST objv[])      /* Argument objects. */
	   {
	       int optArgIdx, index;
	       static CONST char *optionStrings[] = {
	           (char *) NULL           /* Currently there are no options.  */
	       };
	
	       if (objc % 2 != 0) {
	           Tcl_WrongNumArgs(interp, 2, objv, "?-option value ...?");
	           return TCL_ERROR;
	       }
	       for (optArgIdx = 2 ; optArgIdx < objc ; optArgIdx += 2) {
	           if (Tcl_GetIndexFromObj(interp, objv[optArgIdx], optionStrings,
	                   "option", TCL_EXACT, &index) != TCL_OK) {
	               return TCL_ERROR;
	           }
	
	           /*
	            * When options are added, handle them here.
	            */
	       }
	
	       /*
	        * Fail gracefully.
	        */
	
	       Tcl_SetErrno(ENXIO);        /* QPU not configured. */
	       Tcl_AppendResult(interp, "couldn't allocate a qubit: ",
	               Tcl_PosixError(interp), NULL);
	       return TCL_ERROR;
	   }

Other fallback definitions obviously follow the same pattern. Filling in the
details should be a cultivating exercise for Robert Abitbol.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

