# TIP 265: A Convenient C-side Command Option Parser for Tcl
	Author:		Sam Bromley <sam@sambromley.com>
	State:		Final
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Done
	Created:	03-Apr-2006
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Version:	8.6
	Keywords:	Command line parsing, C implementation
-----

# Abstract

The Tk C library provides developers with a _Tk\_ParseArgv_\(\) function that
allows command line parsing of options of the "-option" form. Archived
discussions on news:comp.lang.tcl and on the Wiki indicate that a desire for
similar functionality without Tk has arisen several times in the past. This
TIP presents a Tk-free implementation of _Tk\_ParseArgv\(\)_ named
**Tcl\_ParseArgvObj**, that developers can use to parse "-option" style
command options in C implementations of Tcl commands using the Tcl\_Obj
interface.

# Rationale

While the parsing of command options can be readily accomplished on the Tcl
side, a uniform method for parsing "-option" formed options does not exist on
the C side. Many developers are familiar with the ease of use of libpopt-style
command line parsing, but a similarly clean method does not currently exist in
Tcl. The common approach is to use _Tcl\_GetIndexFromObj_\(\), yet this method
alone does not allow the flexibilty and ease of use of libpopt-style parsing.

One drawback of the classical _Tcl\_GetIndexFromObj_\(\)-only approach is the
need to handle the specifies of your command option parsing for each unique
command. This leads to significant code duplication. A libpopt-style approach
is to bundle all of your parsing specifics into a single array of structures
capturing the details, and then let a specific parsing routine handle the
parsing of every option for you. The **Tcl\_ParseArgvObj**\(\) routine
introduced in this TIP provides this functionality, thereby allowing the
removal of all parsing specifics from the command implimentation other than
that necessary to describe each optional argument.

Additionally, a function **Tcl\_ParseArgsObjv** is provided to provide the
functionality of _Tk\_ParseArgs_\(\) to those who desire it. A discussion in
2002 on news:comp.lang.tcl
<http://groups.google.com/group/comp.lang.tcl/browse_thread/thread/c4fea8f0346cf8ae/036961bf476a3b99?q=tcl_parseargv&rnum=2#036961bf476a3b99> 
indicated that this is a desired feature. Arguments against a
**Tcl\_ParseArgsObjv** implementation include that it is better to do all
command line parsing on the Tcl side. However, this implies writing two
wrapper functions: \(i\) A C implementation of a Tcl command; and \(ii\) A Tcl
wrapper that pre-parses the options before calling the C command. This can
lead to significant duplication of effort when porting a large project to a
Tcl enabled version. This point is particularly relevent in the context of
**Tcl\_ParseArgvObj**\(\), as then one is not assuming that one can simply
replace the main\(\) routine with Tcl, but rather that one is truly embedding
the C side in a larger system.

**Tcl\_ParseArgvObj**\(\) offers a clean method to enable flexible command line
parsing to C implementations of Tcl commands.

# Specification

This document proposes adding **Tcl\_ParseArgsObjv**, whose arguments shall
be:

 > int **Tcl\_ParseArgsObjv**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, const Tcl\_ArgvInfo
   *_argTable_, int \*_objcPtr_, Tcl\_Obj \*const \*_objv_, Tcl\_Obj
   *\*\*_remainingObjv_\)

**Note** that the count of arguments \(referred to by _objcPtr_\) will be
modified, and a modified array will be returned via _remainingObjv_ \(and
need **ckfree**ing\). The input array of objects will not be modified.

# Reference Implementation

A working implementation has been submitted to the Feature Request Tracker at
SourceForge <https://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?&aid=1446696> .

# Example of Use

	#include <tcl.h>
	#include <tclArgv.h> /* not needed if subsumed into core */
	
	int g_test_cmd(ClientData clientData, Tcl_Interp *interp,
	    int objc, Tcl_Obj *CONST objv[])
	{
	  char *gname,*filename;
	  int i;
	  int numRepeat;
	  double scalar;
	  int doErase = 0;
	  size_t size;
	
	  /* this table specifies the possible options, all in one place.*/
	  Tcl_ArgvInfo argTable[] = {
	    {"-erase", TCL_ARGV_CONSTANT, (void *) 1, &doErase,
	      "erase image before plotting"},
	    {"-numRepeat", TCL_ARGV_INT, NULL, &numRepeat,
	      "number of times to repeat test"},
	    {"-scalar", TCL_ARGV_FLOAT, NULL, &scalar,
	      "scalar multiple to use for test"},
	    {"-outfile", TCL_ARGV_STRING, NULL, &filename,
	      "name of file to which to dump result"},
	    {NULL, TCL_ARGV_END, NULL, NULL, NULL}
	  };
	
	  /* Call Tcl_ParseArgObjv to do all the parsing! */
	  if (Tcl_ParseArgsObjv(interp,argTable,&objc,objv,&private_objv) != TCL_OK) {
	     return TCL_ERROR;
	  }
	
	  /* Should recheck objc here */
	
	  /* at this point, any unhandled options are repacked in private_objv */
	  gname = Tcl_GetString(private_obj[1]);
	
	  /* all done */
	  ckfree(private_objv);
	
	  /* rest of code continues here...*/
	
	  return TCL_OK;
	}

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

