# TIP 269: Add 'string is list' to the 'string is' Subcommand
	Author:		Joe Mistachkin <joe@mistachkin.com>
	State:		Final
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Done
	Created:	19-May-2006
	Keywords:	Tcl,lists,strings
	Tcl-Version:	8.5
	Post-History:	
-----

# Abstract

The **string** command supports tests for a number of Tcl's basic types, for
example, integers, doubles, and booleans. This TIP proposes adding lists to
the set of things that can be checked for.

# Rationale

The **string** command includes tests for the common Tcl types: **string is
boolean**, **string is double** and **string is integer**.
Unaccountably, **string is list** is missing from the list, making it
difficult for an input validation procedure to determine whether, in fact, a
string contains a proper list.

Currently, something similar to the following incantation is required:

	 set is_list [expr {![catch {llength $str}]}]

The above construct \(and others like it\) are extremely counterintuitive,
especially to people without intimate knowledge of Tcl.

Compare and contrast with:

	 set is_list [string is list $str]

Since **string is** currently serves in this capacity for determining
whether a string can be correctly interpreted as an integer or double, it
seems only natural to extend it so that it can determine whether a string can
be correctly interpreted as a list.

# Specification

This document proposes augmenting the **string is** command with a **string
is list** subcommand, as follows:

 > **string** **is** **list** ?**-strict**? ?**-failindex** _var_? _str_

The result will be **1** if the string has proper list structure; otherwise,
it will be **0**. The option **-strict** is accepted for syntactic
compatability with other forms of **string is** but has no effect since
empty strings are proper lists.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation of this TIP is available
<http://sf.net/tracker/?func=detail&aid=1491459&group_id=10894&atid=310894> .

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

