# TIP 27: CONST Qualification on Pointers in Tcl API's
	Author:         Kevin Kenny <kennykb@acm.org>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        25-Feb-2001
	Post-History:   
	Discussions-To: news:comp.lang.tcl,mailto:kennykb@acm.org
	Tcl-Version:    8.4
-----

# Abstract

Many of the C and C\+\+ interfaces to the Tcl library lack a CONST
qualifier on the parameters that accept pointers, even though they do
not, in fact, modify the data that the pointers designate.  This lack
causes a persistent annoyance to C/C\+\+ programmers.  Not only is the
code needed to work around this problem more verbose than required; it
also can lead to compromises in type safety.  This TIP proposes that
the C interfaces for Tcl be revised so that functions that accept
pointers to constant data have type signatures that reflect the fact.
The new interfaces will remain backward-compatible with the old,
except that a few must be changed to return pointers to CONST data.
\(Changes of this magnitude, in the past, have been routine in minor
releases; the author of this TIP does not see a compelling reason to
wait for Tcl 9.0 to clean up these API's.\)

# Rationale

When the Tcl library was originally written, the ANSI C standard had
yet to be widely accepted, and the _de facto_ standard language did
not support a _const_ qualifier.  For this reason, none of the older
Tcl API's that accept pointers have CONST qualifiers, even when it is
known that the objects will not be modified.

In interfacing with other systems whose API's were designed after the
ANSI C standard, this limitation becomes annoying.  Code like:

	 const char* const string = " ... whatever ... ";
	 Tcl_SetStringObj( Tcl_GetObjResult( interp ),
	                   (char*) string, /* Have to cast away
	                                    * const-ness here
	                                    * even though the string
	                                    * will only be copied
	                                    */
	                   -1 );

is more verbose than necessary.  It is also unsafe: the cast allows a
number of unsafe type conversions \(the author of this TIP has had to
debug at least one extension where an integer was cast to a character
pointer in this context\).

In an C\+\+ environment where engineering practice forbids using C-style
cast syntax, the syntax gets even more annoying, although it provides
improved safety.  C\+\+ code analogous to the above snippet looks like:

	 const char* const string = "...whatever...";
	 Tcl_SetStringObj( Tcl_GetObjResult( interp ),
	                   const_cast< char* >( string ), -1 );

This code is hardly a paragon of readability.

The popular Gnu C compiler also has a problem with the _char \*_
declaration of so many of the parameters.  With the default set of
compilation options, a call like:

	 Tcl_SetStringObj( Tcl_GetObjResult( interp ),
	                   "Hello world!", -1 );

results in an error; suppressing this message requires either using
the obscure option _-fwritable-strings_ on the compiler command
line, or else applying awkward \(and unsafe\) cast syntax:

	 Tcl_SetStringObj( Tcl_GetObjResult( interp ),
	                   const_cast< char* >( "Hello, world!" ), -1 );

Introducing CONST on parameters, however, does not bring in any
incompatibility; as long as there is a prototype in scope, any
ANSI-compliant compiler will implicitly cast non-CONST arguments to be
type-compatible with CONST formal parameters.

# Specification

This TIP proposes that, wherever possible, Tcl API's that accept
pointers to constant data have their signatures in _tcl.decls_ and
the corresponding source files adjusted to add the CONST qualifier.

The change introduces a potential incompatibility in that code
compiled on a \(hypothetical\) architecture where pointers to constant
data have a different representation from those to non-constant
data will not load against the revised stub table.  This incompatibility
is, in fact, not thought to be a problem, since no known port of
Tcl has encountered such an architecture.

If we confine the scope of this TIP to adding CONST only to
parameters, we preserve complete compatibility with existing
implementations.  It is neither possible nor desirable, however, to
preserve drop-in compatibility across all the API's.  The earliest
example in the stub table is the _Tcl\_PkgRequireEx_ function.  This
function is declared to return _char \*_; the pointer it returns,
however, is into memory managed by the Tcl library.  Any attempt by an
extension to scribble on this memory or free it will result in
corruption of Tcl's internal data structures; it is therefore safer
and more informative to return _CONST char \*_.  \(This particular
example is also highly unlikely to break any existing extension; the
author of this TIP has yet to see one actually use the return value.\)

Some of the API's, such as _Tcl\_GetStringFromObj_, will continue to
return pointers into writable memory inside the Tcl library.
_Tcl\_GetStringFromObj_, for instance, deals with memory that is
managed co-operatively between extensions and the Tcl library; one
simply must trust extensions to do the right thing \(for instance, not
overwrite the string representation of a shared object\).

Some of the API's will not be modified, even though they appear to
accept constant strings.  For instance, _Tcl\_Eval_ modifies its
string argument while it is parsing it, even though it restores its
initial content when it returns.  This behavior has sufficient impact
on performance that it is probably not desirable to change it.  The
cases where the Tcl library does this sort of temporary modification,
however, must be documented in the programmers' manual.  They affect
thread safety and positioning of data in read-only memory.  One can
foresee that cleaning up the API's that do not suffer from
this problem will mean that programmers will be  less tempted
to use unsafe casts on the ones that remain.

Finally, there are a handful of API's that are essentially impossible
to clean up portably; the ones that accept variable arguments come to
mind.  These will be left alone.  One particular case in point is
_Tcl\_SetResult_: its third argument determines whether its second
argument is constant or non-constant.  In an environment without
writable strings, a call like:

	    Tcl_SetResult( interp, "Hello, world!", TCL_STATIC );

or

	    Tcl_SetResult( interp, "Hello, world!", TCL_VOLATILE );

cannot be handled without unsafe casting.  Fortunately, several
alternatives are available.  The most attractive appears to be:

	    Tcl_SetObjResult( interp, 
	                      Tcl_NewStringObj( "Hello, world!", -1 ) );

which is also more informative about what is really going on.  Note
that _TCL\_STATIC_ no longer actually carries the static pointer
around.  Although _Tcl\_SetResult_ appears to do so, as soon as the
command returns, code in _tclExecute.c_ converts the string result
into an object result by calling _Tcl\_GetObjResult_.  The code using
_Tcl\_SetObjResult_ therefore carries no greater performance cost
than the original _Tcl\_SetResult_.

# Reference Implementation

The changes described in this TIP cut across too many functional areas
to be implemented effectively all at once.  Several people have
pointed out that implementing this cleanup all at once appears to be
necessary to avoid "CONST pollution," where the library becomes full
of code that casts away the CONST qualifier.  To study this issue, the
author has conducted the experiment of imposing CONST strings on the
first API in the stubs table: _Tcl\_PkgProvideEx_.

The first concern that arose was that several other functions used the
CONST strings passed as parameters, and these functions also needed to
be updated. Fortunately, all were static within _tclPkg.c_.  Next,
when updating the documentation, the author discovered that five other
functions were documented in the same man page, and shared a common
defintion of the _package_ and _version_ parameters.  They, too,
were included in the change, and once again, the change was propagated
forward into the functions that they called.  \(This activity is where
the issue of replacing _Tcl\_SetResult_ with _Tcl\_SetObjResult_ was
detected.\)

When replacing _Tcl\_SetResult_ with _Tcl\_SetObjResult_, the author
discovered that the _file_ parameter to _Tcl\_DbNewStringObj_ was
also a constant string.  With more enthusiasm than caution, he decided
to attack the corresponding parameter in all the _TCL\_MEM\_DEBUG_
interfaces.  \(In retrospect, it would probably have been easier to
tackle this issue separately.\)  This change wound up
cutting across virtually all of the external interfaces to
_tclStringObj.c_ and _tclBinary.c_ and the associated
documentation.

The author expects that many of the other API's will be much less
closely coupled than the one studied. In particular, now that the
interfaces of _tclStringObj.c_ have been done once, they don't need
to be done again!  In fact, starting with the interfaces, like
_tclStringObj.c_, that are used pervasively throughout the library
and working outward would certainly have been a better course of
action than tracing the dependencies forward from one function chosen
almost at random.

The result of the experimental change was that twenty-eight external
APIs, plus about a dozen static functions, needed to have the CONST
qualifier added to at least one pointer.  After these changes were
made, the test suite compiled, linked, and passed all regression tests
with all combinations of the NODEBUG and TCL\_MEM\_DEBUG options.  It
was nowhere necessary to cast away CONST-ness.  

Possible incompatibility with existing extensions was present
only in that the return values from the four functions,
_Tcl\_PkgPresent_, _Tcl\_PkgPresentEx_, _Tcl\_PkgRequire_, and
_Tcl\_PkgRequireEx_ had the CONST qualifier added.
 These four functions return pointers to memory
that must not be modified nor freed by the caller, so the CONST
qualifier is desirable, but existing extensions may depend on storing
the pointer in a variable that lacks the qualifier.
This level of incompatibility in a minor release has been
thought acceptable in the past; changes required to extensions
are trivial, and once changed, the extensions continue to back-port
cleanly to older releases.

An earlier version of these changes was uploaded to the SourceForge
patch manager as patch number 404026.  The revised version will be
added under the same patch number as soon as the author's technical
problems with uploading patches are resolved.  \(The major difference
between the two patches is that the first patch implements the
two-Stub approach described under "Rejected alternatives" below.

The success of this change has convinced the author of this TIP that
the rest of the changes can be implemented in a staged manner, with
little source-level incompatibility being introduced for
extensions \(and absolutely no incompatibility for stubs-enabled
extensions compiled and linked against earlier versions of the
library\).

# Rejected alternatives

The initial version of this TIP attempted to preserve backward
compatibility of stubs-enabled extensions, even on a hypothetical
architecture where pointer-to-constant and pointer-to-nonconstant
have different representations.

If this level of backward compatibility is desired,
it will be necessary to provide entries in the existing
stub table slots corresponding to the API's that lack the CONST
qualifiers.

The slots in the stub table corresponding to the non-CONST API's can
be filled with wrapper functions.  For example, the following function
definition of _Tcl\_SetStringObj\_NONCONST_ will use the implicit
casting inherent in C to call the function with the new API.

	void
	Tcl_SetStringObj_NONCONST(Tcl_Obj* obj, /* Object to set */
	                          char* bytes,  /* String value to assign */
	                          int length)   /* Length of the string */
	{
	    Tcl_SetStringObj( obj, bytes, length );
	}

This sort of definition is so simple that _tools/genStubs.tcl_
was extended in the original patch accompanying this TIP
to generate it.  For example, the declaration of
_Tcl\_SetStringObj_ that once appeared as:

	declare 65 generic {
	    void Tcl_SetStringObj( Tcl_Obj* objPtr, char* bytes, int length )
	}

was replaced with:

	declare 458 -nonconst 65 generic {
	    void Tcl_SetStringObj( Tcl_Obj* objPtr, CONST char* bytes, int length )
	}

declaring that slot 458 in the stubs table is to be used for the new
API accepting a CONST char\* for the string, while slot 65 remains used
for the legacy implementation.

The difficulty with this approach, which caused it to be
rejected, is that it introduces _forward_ incompatibility.
Any extension compiled against header files from after the change
will fail to load against the stubs table from before the change.
This incompatibility would require extension authors to maintain
sets of header files for \(at least\) the earliest version of Tcl
that they intend to support, rather than always being able to compile
against the most current set.  This problem was thought to be worse
than the hypothetical and possibly non-existent problem of differing
pointer representations.

# Procedural note

The intent of this TIP is that, if approved, it will empower
maintainers of individual modules to add _CONST_ to any API
where it is appropriate, provided that:

   * the change does not introduce "CONST poisoning", that is,
     does not require type casts that remove CONST-ness;

   * the documentation of the API is updated to reflect the
     addition of the CONST qualifier; and

Individual TIP's detailing the changes to particular APIs shall
_not_ be required, provided that the changes comply with these
guidelines.

# Change history

12 March 2001: Rejected the two-Stubs alternative and reworked
the patches to use only one Stub per modified function.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

