# TIP 272: String and List Reversal Operations
	State:		Final
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.5
	Vote:		Done
	Post-History:	
	Author:		Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
	Created:	23-Aug-2006
	Keywords:	Tcl, lreverse
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes adding commands to reverse the order of characters
in strings and elements in lists.

# Rationale

According to a recent thread on news:comp.lang.tcl
<http://groups.google.com/group/comp.lang.tcl/browse_frm/thread/a0b8c98c00a31ffc> ,
there are a number of use cases for reversing strings and lists. While
it has always been possible to write Tcl code to do this, it has
typically been a fairly inefficient operation, and for some algorithms
\(admittedly including ones that are benchmarked when comparing Tcl to
other languages\) this can be the source of a painful slowdown. By
putting an efficient implementation in the Tcl core, we will speed up
quite a bit of code, more than I originally anticipated it seems; this
will make us look better to programmers without much experience with
the language too.

# Proposed Change

I propose to add two commands, **lreverse** to reverse the order of
items in a list, and **string reverse** \(a subcommand of
**string**\) to reverse the order of characters in a string. I do not
propose to provide any C-level API for performing these operations.

## The lreverse Command

This shall have the following syntax:

 > **lreverse** _list_

It shall return a list that is the same as the input list but with the
elements in reverse order.

## The reverse Subcommand of the string Command

This shall have the following syntax:

 > **string reverse** _string_

It shall return a string that is the same as the input string but with
the characters in reverse order. \(Note that it shall also return a
byte array when the input is a byte array.\)

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

