# TIP 273: Add Tcl_Expr... Support to Tcl_Get... Functions
	Author:		Carsten Gosvig <tcl@javalite.com>
	State:		Rejected
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Done
	Created:	30-Aug-2006
	Post-History:	
	Tcl-Version:	8.5
	Obsoletes:	176
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes adding **Tcl\_Expr**... calls to **Tcl\_Get**... functions,
supporting direct use of expressions for arguments to commands that is defined
as int, long, wide-int, double or boolean.

# Rationale

Many of Tcl's commands takes an int, long, wide-int, double or boolean as an
argument. For list and string commands even in the format of **end-**_N_.
However, this is limited to a direct string conversion of the argument to one
of the mentioned types, so for even simple expression the **expr** command
has to be called explicitly, which is quite cumbersome as can be seen in the
following examples:

	set x [lsearch $list $elem]
	set new [lrange $list [expr $x-1] [expr $x+1]]
	
	set x [string first $string "foo"]
	set new [string range $string $x [expr [$x+5]]
	
	set x [lsearch $list $elem]
	set hex [format "%X" [expr {$x & 0xFF}]]
	
	set file [open $name]
	set buf [read $file [expr {$len * 2 - 10}]]
	
	incr var [expr $step*5+1]
	after [expr $sec*1000]

# Specification

By adding a call to a **Tcl\_Expr**... function at the point where the
current conversion fails in the **Tcl\_Get**... functions \(at the label named
_bad_ in the current implementation\) we will add support for using
expressions directly as arguments without needing to go through the **expr**
command:

	set x [lsearch $list $elem]
	set new [lrange $list $x-1 $x+1]
	
	set x [string first $string "foo"]
	set new [string range $string $x $x+5]
	
	set x [lsearch $list $elem]
	set hex [format "%X" {$x & 0xFF}]
	
	set file [open $name]
	set buf [read $file {$len * 2 - 10}]
	
	incr var $step*5+1
	after $sec*1000

This TIP does not propose any alterations to any function or procedure
signatures.

## Implementation Notes

The **Tcl\_Get**<_Type_> functions needs to be updated with a call to the
**Tcl\_Expr**<_Type_> functions, and the
**Tcl\_Get**<_Type_>**FromObj** functions need to be updated with a call
to the **Tcl\_Expr**<_Type_>**Obj** functions.

## Compatibility

There should be no compability issues, as this TIP only adds functionality to
a current error situation.

This proposal renders [[176]](176.md) obsolete, as that describes a solution that is
effectively a subset of this TIP.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

