# TIP 276: Specify and Unify Variable Linking Commands
	Author:         Miguel Sofer <msofer@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        01-Oct-2006
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl,global,variable,upvar,namespace upvar
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

The purpose of this TIP is to simplify and clarify the semantics of the
commands in Tcl that couple variables in different scopes together.

# Rationale

This TIP proposes to specify and document the behaviour of the different
variable linking commands in Tcl: **global**, **variable**, **upvar**
and **namespace upvar**.

In particular, as many of these commands were initially designed to be mainly
useful from within procedure bodies, the documentation does not specify their
behaviour with respect to qualified variable names.

This TIP proposes to specify and document this behaviour, insuring that it is
essentially the same in all these commands.

## Current Situation

There have been a few bug reports concerning the behaviour of variable linking
commands with respect to qualified variable names: 604226, 1274916, 1274918.
Some are real bugs, some are just surprising but correct behaviour, some are
surprising unspecified behaviour.

Within proc bodies all of these commands create local variables that are
linked to original variables elsewhere \(the following assumes that _local_
is a non-qualified name\):

 * "**global** _var_" creates a local variable "[**namespace tail**
   _var_]" that is linked to "_var_" as resolved from the global
   namespace.

 * "**variable** _var_" creates a local variable "[**namespace
   tail** _var_]" that is linked to "_var_" as resolved from
   [**namespace current**].

 * "**upvar** _level var local_" creates a local variable "_local_" that
   is linked to "_var_" as resolved in the context of the frame identified
   by _level_. It is an error to try to link to a proc-local variable from a namespace context. It is an error to link a variable to itself.

 * "**namespace upvar** _ns var local_" creates a local variable
   "_local_" that is linked to "_var_" as resolved from namespace _ns_
   \(itself resolved in the current context\). It is an error to link a variable to itself.

One undocumented issue is what should happen when _local_ is a qualified
name.

Another issue is the behaviour of these commands when invoked outside of
procedure bodies:

 * "**global** _var_" is documented to be a no-op.

 * "**variable** _var_" is documented to create a namespace variable in
   the current namespace, without any mention of the behaviour when "_var_"
   is qualified. Currently that is a a no-op in terms of creating a variable,
   but it can change the value of the target, see [Bug #604226]. If **var** is a simple name and the corresponding variable already existed, **variable** may set its value \(and an internal flag\), but does no linking.

 * "**upvar** _level var local_" creates a variable "_local_" \(as
   resolved from [**namespace current**]\) that is linked to "_var_" as
   resolved in the context of the frame identified by _level_. It is an error to try to link to a proc-local variable from a namespace context. It is an error to link a variable to itself.

 * "**namespace upvar** _ns var local_ creates a variable "_local_" \(as
   resolved from [**namespace current**]\) that is linked to "_var_" as
   resolved from namespace _ns_ \(itself resolved in the current context\). It is an error to link a variable to itself.

# Proposal

This TIP proposes to unify the criteria, making all of these commands
essentially implementable in Tcl from the most general, **upvar**. The
behaviour should _not_ depend on the commands being invoked within or
outside of a procedure body.

In all of the following, it is an error for _local_ to be a qualified
variable name.

 * "**global** _var_" always creates a variable "[**namespace tail**
   _var_]" in the current context, linked to a global variable "_var_".

 * "**variable** _var_" always creates a variable "[**namespace tail**
   _var_]" in the current context, linked to a variable "_var_" as
   resolved from [**namespace current**].

 * "**upvar** _level var local_" always creates a variable "_local_" in
   the current context, linked to "_var_" as resolved in the context of the
   frame identified by _level_. It is an error to try to link to a proc-local variable from a namespace context.

 * "**namespace upvar** _ns var local_" always creates a variable
   "_local_" in the current context, linked to "_var_" as resolved from
   namespace _ns_ \(itself resolved in the current context\).

In all cases, attempting to link a variable to itself will be a no-op.

# Compatibility

This TIP may cause breakage in some scripts relying on undocumented behaviour.

The specification changes for **global** and **variable** outside of proc bodies is almost certainly implementing what the programmer meant them to do, hence likely to fix more bugs than it causes. 

# Reference Implementation and Documentation

Forthcoming at SF.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

