# TIP 281: Improvements in System Error Handling
	Author:         David Gravereaux <davygrvy@pobox.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        08-Oct-2006
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       POSIX,channel driver,errorCode
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This TIP describes the need for better error codes and message handling of
system errors to be returned to scripts.

# Rationale

The current method for handling of system errors is done via the
_Tcl\_PosixError\(\)_ API call. Its job is to grab the value of _errno_ and
format it for display to a script within the **errorCode** special variable.

Unfortunately, not all such system errors are left in _errno_ and on
Windows, not all information can be translated effectively to a POSIX error
code without loss of valuable information to the user.

On UNIX, _gethostbyname\(\)_ for example, leaves its errors in _h\_errno_
<http://www.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/basedefs/netdb.h.html> . If we
look at our use of _gethostbyname\(\)_ in unix/tclUnixChan.c for the
_CreateSocketAddress\(\)_ function, you'll see we are setting _errno_ to a
wrong code rather than retrieving the proper error information defined in
_netdb.h_.

An example of the current mistranslation would be:

	% socket foo.example.com 1234
	couldn't open socket: host is unreachable
	% set errorCode
	POSIX EHOSTUNREACH {host is unreachable}

And on Windows:

	% socket foo.example.com 1234
	couldn't open socket: invalid argument
	% set errorCode
	POSIX EINVAL {invalid argument}

Notice that the two are different as well as wrong. EHOSTUNREACH is a routing
error at the IP level and is returned by connect\(\), send\(\).. etc., not by
gethostbyname\(\). For windows, the error translation function
TclWinConvertWSAError\(\) sets _errno_ to EINVAL for a WSAHOST\_NOT\_FOUND even
though the code in CreateSocketAddress\(\) appears to set errno to EHOSTUNREACH.
What I would like to see is the following \(on all platforms\):

	% socket foo.example.com 1234
	couldn't open socket: No such host is known
	% set errorCode
	NETDB HOST_NOT_FOUND {No such host is known}

If we could specify a place from where the error could be retrieved along with
the formatting functions for that type, Tcl's error information to the user
would be improved.

A facility to extend/add formatters would also help extension authors.

For example with the windows port of Expect, there are numerous specific
errors that Expect could return regarding how the Console API debugger was
unable to function, but the error path is only limited to POSIX pipe errors
rather than anything specific.

I tried to make a facility to manage these specific errors in a controlled way
using a message catalog
<http://www.pobox.com/~davygrvy/expect-src/win/expWinErr.mc>  to compile into
the expect dll a "windows"-ish style of error management along with a specific
"EXPECT" formatter, see ExpWinError\(\) [last function in file]
<http://www.pobox.com/~davygrvy/expect-src/win/expWinUtils.cpp> . I used the
"customer" bit in the **errorCode** as a key to forward to the "WINDOWS"
formatter and thought it was quite smart of me.

But alas... the POSIX restriction was not to be bypassed in a manageable
manner.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is not done at this time. An experimental WINDOWS
**errorCode** formatter can be seen @
<http://iocpsock.cvs.sourceforge.net/iocpsock/iocpsock/tclWinError.c?revision=HEAD&view=markup> 

# Copyright

This document is in the public domain.

