# TIP 284: New 'invoke' and 'namespace invoke' Commands
	Author:         Miguel Sofer <msofer@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        01-Oct-2006
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This TIP exposes a Tcl script-level interface to the direct command invokation
engine already present in the Tcl library for years.

# Proposed New Commands

This TIP proposes a new subcommand to **namespace**, **invoke**, with the
following syntax:

 > **namespace invoke** _namespace_ _cmd_ ?_arg_ ...?

This invokes the command called **cmd** in the caller's scope, as resolved
from namespace _namespace_, with the supplied arguments. If _namespace_
does not exist, the command returns an error.

This TIP also proposes a new command:

 > **invoke** _level_ _cmd_ ?_arg_ ...?

This invokes the command _cmd_ in level _level_ with the supplied
_arg_uments. The syntax of _level_ is the same as that required by
**uplevel**.

# Rationale

There is currently no script-level equivalent to _Tcl\_EvalObjv\(\)_, though
the functionality is provided by one of:

	   eval [list cmd ?arg ...?]
	   {*}[list cmd ?arg ...?]

Note that the core tries to optimise the first case, but has to be careful to
only avoid reparsing when it is guaranteed safe to do so. The notation is
rather clumsy too.

The proposed new commands try to improve this situation, with the added
functionality of determining the namespace in which the command name is to be
resolved \(functionality which was very difficult to use previously using the
script-level API\). In this manner it is possible for the invocation to make
good use of **namespace path** and **namespace unknown** features.

The new command **invoke** could be implemented as:

	   proc invoke {level args} {
	       if {[llength $args] == 0} {
	           return -code error SomeMessage
	       }
	       if {[string is integer $level] && ($level >= 0)} {
	           incr level
	       }
	       uplevel $level $args
	   }]

# Reference Implementation and Documentation

[RFE 1577324] \(which depends on [Patch 1577278]\) provides an
implementation of **namespace invoke**.
<https://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?aid=1577324> 
<https://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?aid=1577278> 

# Differences to Other Commands

   1. Both these commands perform command invocation, as opposed to the script
      evaluation done by **eval**, **uplevel**, **namespace eval** and
      **namespace inscope**

   1. **namespace inscope** does a magic expansion of the first argument,
      **namespace invoke** takes the first argument as a command name. In
      other words, **namespace inscope** can be used with a command prefix.
      _Feedback on the semantics suggest that this is a worthy feature, very
      useful for packing up command prefixes. This tip may yet be revised or
      withdrawn to take that into consideration._

   1. Both **namespace eval** and **namespace inscope** add a call
      frame,**namespace invoke** does not - it invokes in the caller's
      frame.

# Sample Usage

In tcllib's **::math::calculus::romberg** we see \(edited for brevity\):

	    # Replace f with a context-independent version
	
	    set fqname [uplevel 1 [list namespace which [lindex $f 0]]]
	    set f [lreplace $f 0 0 $fqname]
	    ...
	    set cmd $f
	    lappend cmd [expr {0.5 * ($a + $b)}]
	    set v [eval $cmd]

where the command name in the prefix _f_ is replaced with its fully
qualified name. A further variable is lappended, and the result is sent to
**eval**.

With **namespace invoke** and **invoke** this would be coded as:

	    set ns [invoke 1 namespace current]
	    set f [list namespace invoke $ns {*}$f]
	    ...
	    set v [{*}$f [expr {0.5 * ($a + $b)}]]

If both new commands took the _cmd_ argument as a prefix to be expanded \(as
suggested by some early commenters\), it would be even nicer for this usage:

	    set ns [invoke 1 [list namespace current]]
	    set f [list namespace invoke $ns $f]
	    ...
	    set v [invoke 0 $f [expr {0.5 * ($a + $b)}]]

The same thing \(with slightly different semantics and a performance cost due
to script evaluation instead of command invocation\) could be obtained today by
doing:

	    set f [uplevel 1 [list namespace code [list uplevel 1 $f]]]
	    ...
	    set v [eval [lappend f [expr {0.5 * ($a + $b)}]]]

In order to fully reproduce the semantics and performance it would have to be:

	    set f [uplevel 1 [list namespace code [list uplevel 1 $f]]]
	    ...
	    lset f end end [linsert [lindex $f end end] end [expr {0.5 * ($a + $b)}]]  
	    set v [eval $f]

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

