# TIP 289: Revision of [lrepeat] Argument Order
	Author:         Peter Spjuth <peter.spjuth@space.se>
	Author:          <dgp@users.sf.net>
	State:          Rejected
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        26-Oct-2006
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to alter the argument order of **lrepeat** to be similar
to **string repeat**.

# Rationale

In [[136]](136.md), lrepeat is defined as:

 > **lrepeat** _number element1_ ?_element2_? ?_element3_? ...

whereas the old string repeat command is:

 > **string repeat** _string number_

This difference between similar commands is bound to cause confusion.
Consistency is good.

# Specification

Change lrepeat's argument order to:

 > **lrepeat** _element1_ ?_element2_? ?_element3_? ... **number**

# Examples:

	 lrepeat 0 100                - returns list of 100 zeros
	 lrepeat [lrepeat 0 100] 100  - returns 100x100 matrix (list of lists) of zeros
	 lrepeat a b c 3              - returns nine-element list {a b c a b c a b c}
	 lrepeat a b c 1              - identical to [list a b c]

# Discussion:

DGP: The main feature that appears to get lost in this change is the
ability to redirect aliases or subcommands of ensembles to **lrepeat**
calls with the number of repetitions already filled in.

PS: On the other hand, you get the ability to redirect aliases or
subcommands of ensembles to **lrepeat** calls with the elements already
filled in.

DGP: I skimmed the old TIP 136 messages in the TCLCORE archives. One
thing to note is that the existing **lrepeat** syntax in 8.5a5 was
chosen in part to be consistent with the existing **struct::list
repeat** syntax in the struct::list package.

DGP: I think it's fair to say that given a complete "do-over"
more of us would opt to change **string repeat** to agree
with **lrepeat** and **struct::list repeat** than the other
way around.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

