# TIP 292: Allow Unquoted Strings in Expressions
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Vote:		Pending
	Post-History:	
	Author:		Brian Griffin <bgriffin@model.com>
	Created:	01-Nov-2006
	Keywords:	Tcl, expr
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes allowing unquoted words to be recognized as strings in
expressions \(**expr**, **if**, **while**\).

# Rationale

Currently the following fails with a syntax error:

	    set foo bar
	    expr {$foo eq bar}

This seems antithetical to the EIAS Tao of Tcl. The **set** command does not
require the quotes, so why should **expr**, especially since the operands of
the **eq** and **ne** operators are treated as strings. It also seems
reasonable for the **==** and **!=** operators to reject unquoted strings
as not a valid operand. This provides some enforcement for numerical vs.
string comparison by forcing the use of quotes to convert the numeric **==**
to a string equality test.

The rationale for making such a change is it will make complex code a bit
easier to read.  For example, I can:

	        set var ENUM_VALUE_ONE
	
	        switch $var {
	                ENUM_VALUE_ZERO { ... }
	                ENUM_VALUE_ONE  { ... }
	                default { ... }
	        }
	
	        if {[lsearch $supplied_values ENUM_VALUE_ONE] >= 0} { ... }
	
	        if {[string equals $var ENUM_VALUE_ONE]} { ... }

but I must:

	        if {$var eq "ENUM_VALUE_ONE"} { ... }

which could lead someone reading the code to incorrectly conclude that
ENUM\_VALUE\_ONE is not the same thing as "ENUM\_VALUE\_ONE" or miss the fact that
they are the same, especially when using a syntax highlighting editor.

# Proposed Change

Change the expression parser to accept unquoted words that are not function
names as strings. Modify _EqualityExpr_ to reject unqoted strings for
"**==**", but allow them for "**eq**".

# Draft Implementation

None, at the moment.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

