# TIP 295: Enhance Arguments to lrange
	Author:         Andreas Leitgeb <avl@logic.at>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        06-Nov-2006
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl,lrange
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes an enhancement to **lrange** and **string range** that lets them take more than one start-end index pair.

# Rationale

Sometimes you need to extract a non-continuous selection of elements from some
list and build a new list from them. This requires the use of multiple calls
to **lrange** and a surrounding **concat** to build the final list.
However, since the following fails with a syntax error:

	    lrange {a b c d e f}  1 3  5 5

It would seem a reasonable extension for such a usage of **lrange** to
return "b c d f". This would also make following pattern of usage feasible:

	 lassign [lrange $someList 0 2  10 12]  var0 var1 var2 var10 var11 var12

The indices should _not_ be required to be in ascending order.
This is meant such that the ranges may be overlapping at will. E.g.:

	 [lrange $list 0 end 0 end] == [lrepeat 2 {*}$list]

This TIP does NOT change the way each range is interpreted.
Reversing lists is not in the scope of this TIP.

# Proposed Change

Change the implementation of **lrange** to accept any odd number of
arguments, with semantics \(upon supply of a correct number of arguments\)
equivalent to:

	 proc lrange-new {list args} {
	    set result [list]
	    foreach {start end} $args {
	       lappend result {*}[lrange $list $start $end]
	    }
	    return $result
	 }

# Draft Implementation

Just the above mentioned procedure, at the moment.

# Further Thoughts

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

