# TIP 297: Integer Type Introspection and Conversion
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sf.net>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        20-Nov-2006
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Keywords:	Tcl, number, expression
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes changes to complete the set of commands to test and convert
among Tcl's integer types.

# Background

There are four integer types that appear in Tcl's C API. They are _int_,
_long_, _Tcl\_WideInt_, and _mp\_int_. The corresponding routines to pull
a value of each of those types from a _Tcl\_Obj_ are **Tcl\_GetIntFromObj**,
**Tcl\_GetLongFromObj**, **Tcl\_GetWideIntFromObj**, and
**Tcl\_GetBignumFromObj**. These integer types form increasing sets. That is,
every _Tcl\_Obj_ that can return an _int_ can also return a _long_,
_Tcl\_WideInt_, or _mp\_int_.

Strictly speaking, the set of _Tcl\_Obj_ values that can successfully return
either and _int_, _long_, or _Tcl\_WideInt_ is platform-dependent,
because the size of these types is platform dependent.
**Tcl\_GetIntFromObj** accepts integer values in any format \(decimal, binary,
octal, hexadecimal, etc., see **TCL\_PARSE\_INTEGER\_ONLY** in [[249]](249.md)\) that are
within the inclusive platform-dependent range \(**-UINT\_MAX**,
**UINT\_MAX**\). **Tcl\_GetLongFromObj** accepts integer values in any format
that are within the inclusive platform-dependent range \(**-ULONG\_MAX**,
**ULONG\_MAX**\). **Tcl\_GetWideIntFromObj** accepts integer values in any
format that are within the inclusive platform-dependent range
\(**-ULLONG\_MAX**, **ULLONG\_MAX**\), or the appropriate equivalent for the
platform. **Tcl\_GetBignumFromObj** accepts integer values in any format with
\(effectively\) no limit on range.

The most common example of platform dependence of results seen at the script
level is the different results of **[expr int(.)]** on most 32-bit
systems,

	 % set tcl_platform(wordSize)
	 4
	 % expr int(1<<31)
	 -2147483648

compared with LP64 systems.

	 % set tcl_platform(wordSize)
	 8
	 % expr int(1<<31)
	 2147483648

These differences show up most unfortunately when implementing algorithms
designed to operate explicitly on 32-bit buffers, where the only portable way
to do the operations in Tcl is with careful application of masking \(_&
0xffffffff_\). For one well-known example, see the _sha1_ package in tcllib.
The additional operations in Tcl expressions harm performance.

There are other Tcl routines that pull values from _Tcl\_Obj_ that accept
supersets of one of the integer types. An example is **Tcl\_GetIndexFromObj**
which will accept anything that **Tcl\_GetIntFromObj** accepts, as well as
other string values. There are also Tcl built-in commands that accept
arguments that are supersets of one of the integer types. An example is
**uplevel** which accepts as its level argument anything that
**Tcl\_GetIntFromObj** accepts, as well as other string values.

All Tcl commands are ultimately defined by the C command procedures that run
to implement them, and when those command procedures use the routines
mentioned above to pull values from command arguments, the result is that the
Tcl commands will succeed or fail depending on whether or not an integer value
of the right type has been provided by the caller. As a simple example:

	 % lindex {} 0xffffffff
	 % lindex {} 0x100000000
	 bad index "0x100000000": must be integer or end?-integer?

In order to avoid errors from commands, a cautious programmer may wish to test
whether a value is of an acceptable type before passing it to a command. The
**string is integer** command has long offered this facility for commands
that require \(a superset of\) an _int_.

	 % string is integer 0xffffffff
	 1
	 % string is integer 0x100000000
	 0

Most of Tcl's built-in commands that accept an integer valued argument require
that argument to be acceptable to **Tcl\_GetIntFromObj** and the existing
**string is integer** command provides sufficient introspection.

[[188]](188.md) created the new command **string is wideinteger**, and that is
suitable for testing values for the small number of Tcl commands that strictly
require a value acceptable to **Tcl\_GetWideIntFromObj**. Those commands
are:

	 after $wide
	 binary format w $wide
	 chan seek $chan $wide
	 chan truncate $chan $wide
	 clock add $wide
	 clock format $wide

There are some built-in Tcl commands that require an argument that is
acceptable to **Tcl\_GetBignumFromObj**. That is, the argument must be an
integer, but no range limit is imposed. Currently there is no test command
appropriate for argument checking for these commands.

	 dict incr $dictVar $bignumkey $bignum
	 expr srand($bignum)
	 expr ~$bignum
	 expr $bignum % $bignum
	 expr $bignum << $int
	 expr $bignum >> $bignum
	 expr $bignum & $bignum
	 expr $bignum ^ $bignum
	 expr $bignum | $bignum
	 incr $bignumVar $bignum
	 format $integerSpecifier $bignum

There are some built-in Tcl commands that require an argument that is
acceptable to **Tcl\_GetLongFromObj**. Currently there is no test command
appropriate for argument checking for these commands.

	 binary format i $long
	 binary format s $long
	 binary format c $long
	 file atime $path $long
	 file attributes $path -permissions $long
	 file mtime $path $long

Note that the accepted ranges of the **Tcl\_GetFooFromObj** routines can lead
to surprising results. For example, **Tcl\_GetIntFromObj** accepts values
from **-UINT\_MAX** to **UINT\_MAX**. For some things this is good, since it
supports

	 binary format i 0x80000000

on 32-bit platforms, which is a common coding style. However the same range
acceptance leads to surprising \(and arguably incorrect, in the presence of
bignum support\) things like:

	 % string repeat a -4294967290
	 aaaaaa

It seems there are good uses for both strict and liberal routines for pulling
integer ranges from a _Tcl\_Obj_. Compatibility concerns would favor keeping
the existing routines liberal, and adding strict counterparts. If this is
pursued, however, another collection of **string is** test commands would be
needed as well.

# Proposed Changes

Still pondering how best to react to this background. Discussion invited on
TCLCORE.

# Compatibility

# Reference Implementation

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

