# TIP 300: Examine Glyph Substitution in the 'font actual' Command
	Author:         Kevin B. Kenny <kennykb@acm.org>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        25-Nov-2006
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
	Keywords:	Tk
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes enhancing the **font actual** command to allow determining
the actual font to be used when rendering a specific character.

# Background

Tk, when rendering strings in a widget, often needs to augment the characters
in the requested font with characters borrowed from other fonts. As of the
date of this TIP, there is no way for a program to introspect this mechanism.
This ability has been requested by several user interface designers, because
the interfaces are often more attractive if the substitute fonts are used
directly, or simply to determine what font was chosen.

# Proposed Change

This TIP proposes modifying the **font actual** command to have the syntax:

 > **font actual** _font_ ?**-displayof** _window_? ?_option_?
   ?**--**? ?_char_?

The _font_, **-displayof** and _option_ arguments are unchanged from the
current [font actual] command.

The **--** option marks the end of options. It is needed if _option_ is
not supplied and _char_ may be a hyphen, to distinguish _char' from a
misspelt option.

The _char_ option must be a single character.

The result of the command, if the _char_ option is supplied, is the actual
font used to render the given character, rather than the base font.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation for the proposed feature, including documentation
and test suite updates, is at SourceForge as Tk Patch \#1602955.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

