# TIP 302: Fix "after"'s Sensitivity To Adjustments Of System Clock
	Author:         Alexandre Ferrieux <alexandre.ferrieux@gmail.com>
	Author:         Kevin Kenny <kennykb@acm.org>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        13-Dec-2006
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl,time changes
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

Currently, **after** tasks can be drastically delayed or sped up simply by
adjusting the system clock. This is due to the implementation's use of an
_absolute_ target date based on the system clock. The idea of this TIP is to
use another timebase for this purpose: the count of ticks from boot, which is
not affected by system time adjustments.

# Background

The basis of the implementation of **after** is, on each call to
**vwait**, to compute the _timeout_ argument to select\(\) by difference
between the stored target date of the earliest event and the current system
date \(_gettimeofday\(\)_\). This is perfect while the system date ticks
regularly. But if, say, the clock is set back by 5 minutes, then an after
handler scheduled 1 second ago which was just about to fire, will have 5
minutes yet to wait before its \(unmodified\) target date is reached. So, if
this handler was part of a 1-Hz periodic task, there will be a huge gap of
5:01 between two ticks at that point. If some other component is expecting
some kind of regularity, even with a conservative timeout of 10 times the
expected period, it _will_ time out, decide the periodic task is dead, and
possibly take drastic action.

# Proposed Change

This TIP proposes to use other timebases instead of gettimeofday\(\) in the
vwait/after code: **times\(\)** in unix, **GetTickCount\(\)** in Windows.
These clocks suffer _no_ sysadmin tinkering.

# Potential Break Of Compatibility

It has been objected that _some_ applications today may be using **after**
with an _absolute_ spirit; IOW such apps are supposed to _rely_ on the
fact that the after handler will fire when the system clock equals the target
date computed once for all when **after** was called. A prototype example
would be a crontab-like task, which would itself compute the offset by
difference between the target date and the current **clock seconds**.

## Arguments For Breaking It Anyway

 1. This _absolute_ interpretation is far from being natural, because
    **after**'s argument is an _offset_.

 2. This technique is not usable for a longer range than 25 days \(MAXINT
    milliseconds\), so not applicable e.g. for a personal schedule.

 3. The **overwhelming** majority of uses of **after** takes the
    _relative_ interpretation \(periodic tasks, timeouts\) and _cannot_ work
    correctly today.

 4. If this TIP were implemented incompatibly \(i.e. without a specific flag to
    **after**\), those _absolute-minded_ apps could simply be adapted
    _and_ improved in both robustness and range by using a periodic task
    which polls **clock seconds**.

 5. There is little evidence that the total number of _absolute-minded_ apps
    exceeds **one** \(see discussion on news:comp.lang.tcl "[after] fooled
    by shifting date"\)

# Syntax For Not Breaking It If Deemed Useful

Of course, if this supposed singleton is in fact many, or has enough weight to
preclude an improvement of the rest of Tcl timers, we can do:

 > **after -robust** _millisecs_

or any other colorful option name. But in this case there is a high risk that:
_either_ **after -robust** becomes the dominant use, thus cluttering the
code in many places, _or_ people remain largely unaware of the problem,
stick to the default **after**, and space shuttles fall by dozens.

# Escalation To The TCT

I'll leave it to the TCT to arbitrate, and decide whether _fixing_ a widely
used core primitive can outweigh breaking a rare and clumsy use.

# Reference Implementation

I have not yet written a reference implementation; I assume somebody with a
more fluent practice of the core will do so more efficiently. However, gentle
arm twisting, etc.

As mentioned 2021-09-01 by Christian Werner, Androwish/Undroidwish has a reference implementation for Android and Unix.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

# Comments

The _times_ function in Unix is _not_ an appropriate time base.  It reports the user and system time \(CPU time, in other words\) of the currently executing process and its children.  As far as I have been able to determine, Unix assumes that the system time reported by
_gettimeofday_ is the sole time base for absolute timing; if multiple timers are required in a single process, _gettimeofday_ appears to be the only reference that is available.

