# TIP 31: CVS tags in the Tcl and Tk repositories
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sourceforge.net>
	Author:         miguel sofer <mig@utdt.edu>
	Author:         Jeff Hobbs <JeffH@ActiveState.com>
	Author:         Kevin Kenny <kennykb@acm.org>
	Author:         David Gravereaux <davygrvy@pobox.com>
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <fellowsd@cs.man.ac.uk>
	Author:         Andreas Kupries <andreas_kupries@users.sourceforge.net>
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@man.ac.uk>
	Author:         <dgp@users.sf.net>
	Author:         Kevin Kenny <kennykb@acm.org >
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Informative
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        12-Mar-2001
	Post-History:   
-----

# Abstract

This document keeps a record of the CVS tags used in the Tcl and Tk
repositories and their meanings.

# Background

CVS uses tags to collectively label a particular set of revisions of a
particular set of files.  With a tag, one may easily request all the
revisions of all the files that correspond to something meaningful,
such as an official release of a project.

There are two kinds of tags provided by CVS.  First is the release tag
that simply marks a set of revisions as belonging together as a unit.
Each release of a project should be tagged with a release tag.  Other
development milestones may also receive a release tag.  Release tags
are useful for marking any point in development that will be useful to
return to or compare against.

The second kind of tag is a branch tag.  It does not mark a single
revision of a file, but an entire branch of development of a file.
Branch tags are the means by which different working directories can
track different branches of development.

A tag may be used in a CVS repository only once, so we must keep track
of what tags have already been used, and what they mean.  The
remaining sections of this TIP record the tags in use.  This TIP
should be kept up to date by adding any new tags here as they are
added to the CVS repository.

# Release Tags

The following tags in the Tcl and Tk CVS repositories correspond to
the following releases of Tcl/Tk:

   * _core-8-6-b1_ - Tcl/Tk 8.6b1

   * _core-8-6-a3_ - Tcl/Tk 8.6a3

   * _core-8-6-a2_ - Tcl/Tk 8.6a2

   * _core-8-6-a1_ - Tcl/Tk 8.6a1

   * _core-8-5-6_  - Tcl/Tk 8.5.6

   * _core-8-5-5_  - Tcl/Tk 8.5.5

   * _core-8-5-4_  - Tcl/Tk 8.5.4

   * _core-8-5-3_  - Tcl/Tk 8.5.3

   * _core-8-5-2_  - Tcl/Tk 8.5.2

   * _core-8-5-1_  - Tcl/Tk 8.5.1

   * _core-8-5-0_  - Tcl/Tk 8.5.0

   * _core-8-5-b3_ - Tcl/Tk 8.5b3

   * _core-8-5-b2_ - Tcl/Tk 8.5b2

   * _core-8-5-b1_ - Tcl/Tk 8.5b1

   * _core-8-5-a6_ - Tcl/Tk 8.5a6

   * _core-8-5-a5_ - Tcl/Tk 8.5a5

   * _core-8-5-a4_ - Tcl/Tk 8.5a4

   * _core-8-5-a3_ - Tcl/Tk 8.5a3

   * _core-8-5-a2_ - Tcl/Tk 8.5a2

   * _core-8-5-a1_ - Tcl/Tk 8.5a1

   * _core-8-4-18_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.18

   * _core-8-4-17_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.17

   * _core-8-4-16_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.16

   * _core-8-4-15_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.15

   * _core-8-4-14_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.14

   * _core-8-4-13_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.13

   * _core-8-4-12_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.12

   * _core-8-4-11_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.11

   * _core-8-4-10_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.10

   * _core-8-4-9_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.9

   * _core-8-4-8_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.8

   * _core-8-4-7_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.7

   * _core-8-4-6_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.6

   * _core-8-4-5_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.5

   * _core-8-4-4_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.4

   * _core-8-4-3_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.3

   * _core-8-4-2_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.2

   * _core-8-4-1_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.1

   * _core-8-4-0_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4.0

   * _core-8-4-b2_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4b2

   * _core-8-4-b1_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4b1

   * _core-8-4-a4_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4a4

   * _core-8-4-a3_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4a3

   * _core-8-4-a2_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4a2

   * _core-8-4-a1_ - Tcl/Tk 8.4a1

   * _core-8-3-4_ - Tcl/Tk 8.3.4

   * _core-8-3-3_ - Tcl/Tk 8.3.3

   * _core-8-3-2_ - Tcl/Tk 8.3.2

   * _core-8-3-1_ - Tcl/Tk 8.3.1

   * _core-8-3-0_ - Tcl/Tk 8.3.0

   * _core-8-3-b2_ - Tcl/Tk 8.3b2

   * _core-8-3-b1_ - Tcl/Tk 8.3b1

   * _core-8-2-3_ - Tcl/Tk 8.2.3

   * _core-8-2-2_ - Tcl/Tk 8.2.2

   * _core-8-2-1_ - Tcl/Tk 8.2.1

   * _core-8-2-0_ - Tcl/Tk 8.2.0

   * _core-8-2-b3_ - Tcl/Tk 8.2b3

   * _core-8-2-b2_ - Tcl/Tk 8.2b2

   * _core-8-2-b1_ - Tcl/Tk 8.2b1

   * _core-8-1-1_ - Tcl/Tk 8.1.1

   * _core-8-1-0_ - Tcl/Tk 8.1.0

   * _core-8-1-b3_ - Tcl/Tk 8.1b3

   * _core-8-1-b2_ - Tcl/Tk 8.1b2

   * _core-8-1-b1_ - Tcl/Tk 8.1b1

   * _core-8-0-5_ - Tcl/Tk 8.0.5

   * _core-8-0-4_ - Tcl/Tk 8.0.4

   * _core-8-0-3_ - Tcl/Tk 8.0.3

   * _core-8-0-2_ - Tcl/Tk 8.0p2

# Branch Tags - Official Development

The following branch tags label branches of development from which
releases of Tcl/Tk are generated:

   * _HEAD_ - current development of new features; spawns future
     alpha and beta releases.

   * _core-8-5-branch_ - bug fix branch; spawns 8.5._X_ releases
     after 8.5.2.

   * _core-8-4-branch_ - bug fix branch; spawns 8.4._X_ releases
     after 8.4.2.

# Branch Tags - Features

The following branch tags label branches on which features are being
developed and tested.  No releases of Tcl/Tk will be spawned from these
branches.  As the features mature, they will be merged onto the HEAD
branch, or they may be rejected.

   * _core-8-4-win-speedup_ \(Tk\) - Work on improving performance of
     Tk on the Windows platforms.

   * _tip-59-implementation_ \(Tcl\) - For coordinating between Andreas
     Kupries and the platform maintainers on implementing [[59]](59.md).

   * _mod-8-3-4-branch_ \(Tcl\) - Contains the modularization work done
     by ActiveState for Cisco. Not for public modification.

   * _dgp-refactor_ \(Tcl\) - Various refactoring exercises.

   * _kennykb-numerics-branch_ \(Tcl\) - Explorations into improving
     Tcl's numeric properties, including support for large integers
     and rationals, and improvements to Tcl's floating point
     conversions.

   * _msofer-wcodes-branch_ \(Tcl\) - Experimental features for the bytecode engine.

   * _tip-257-implementation-branch_ \(Tcl\) - For development of the
     implementation of [[257]](257.md). Branch root version at the tag
     _tip-257-implementation-branch-root_.

   * _tip-278-branch_ \(Tcl\) - Work on [[278]](278.md).

   * _core-stabilizer-branch_ \(Tcl/Tk\) - Branch where the version
     number is bumped to the next level of stability above the HEAD
     for advance testing of issues that might arise when the HEAD is
     declared more stable.

   * _tip-162-branch_ \(Tcl\) - Work on [[162]](162.md).  Includes extreme
     windows channel driver rewrite.  Maintained by davygrvy@pobox.com

# Dead Branches

The following branch tags label branches that are no longer being
developed.  Some are old official branches from which releases are no
longer being spawned.  Others are feature development branches that
have been merged into an official branch, or rejected.

   * _macosx-8-4-branch_ - Branch used during MacOSX porting work.
     Merged into 8.4.0.

   * _dkf-64bit-support-branch_ \(Tcl\) - Work on supporting 64-bit
     numbers, particularly on 32-bit platforms \(including large file
     support.\)  See [[72]](72.md) for overview.  Results merged into HEAD.

   * _kennykb-tip-22-33_ \(Tcl\) - Work on implementing the changes
     described in [[22]](22.md) and [[33]](33.md).  Abandoned.

   * _dgp-privates-into-namespace_ \(Tk\) - Work on moving Tk's private
     commands and variables into the ::tk namespace and its children
     \(see [[44]](44.md).\)  Merged into Tk 8.4a3.

   * _core-8-3-1-io-rewrite_ \(Tcl\) - Work rewriting Tcl's IO Channels
     to correct problems with the implementation of stacked channels.
     Merged into Tcl 8.3.2 and Tcl 8.4a2.

   * _daves-chop-branch_ \(Tcl\) - Attempts to modularize subsystems so
     they can be easily removed at compile-time.  First step towards
     a 'tinytcl' on the HEAD rather than starting with an older
     version.  \(maintained by davygrvy@pobox.com\)

   * _daves-mk-branch_ \(Tcl\) - On-going work to improve the native
     windows makefiles.  One top-root makefile.win will serve as the
     starting point for MSVC\+\+, BCC, and Watcom.  Extreme use of
     shared info will highlight this new system.  This is not TEA -
     this is anti-TEA. \(maintained by davygrvy@pobox.com\)

   * _core-8-3-1-branch_ - Spawned Tcl/Tk 8.3.X releases.

   * _core-8-2-1-branch_ - Spawned Tcl/Tk 8.2.X releases.

   * _core-8-1-branch-old_ - Spawned Tcl/Tk 8.1bX releases.

   * _dev-stubs-branch_, _dev-8-1-stubs-branch_ - Two branches on
     which the stubs interfaces were developed.  Merged into Tcl 8.1.

   * _msofer-bcEngine_ \(Tcl\) - Work on improving performance of the
     bytecode engine.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

