# TIP 310: Add a New Pseudo-Random Number Generator
	Author:		Arjen Markus <arjen.markus@wldelft.nl>
	State:		Rejected
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Done
	Created:	07-Jan-2008
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Version:	8.6
	Keywords:	expr
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to add a new **expr** function: a random number generator
with a longer sequence than the one currently in the core.

# Rationale

The **expr** command has used a straightforward implementation of a
pseudo-random number generator via the rand\(\) function for many years. This
has a number of desirable properties, but better ones \(e.g. with a longer
sequence\) have been known for a long time. This TIP proposes a new function as
an alternative PRNG.

PRNGs with different properties can be important for Monte Carlo simulations
and other algorithms that require large amounts of random numbers without
having to worry about the sequence length.

# Proposal

Introduce a new function, _randM\(\)_, as an alternative PRNG to the
**expr** command. This function is based on work by George Marsaglia and
implementations in many different languages are available on the Internet.
There will be a corresponding seed function _srandM\(x\)_.

The new function is not a replacement of the original rand\(\) function.

# Implementation

With the new tcl::mathfunc mechanism \([[232]](232.md)\) it should be simple to add this
function to the core.

An example implementation in Tcl is given below:

	 # marsaglia.tcl --
	 #     Implementation of a PRNG according to George Marsaglia
	 #
	 namespace eval ::PRNG {
	     variable mod [expr {wide(256)*wide(256)*wide(256)*wide(256)-5}]
	     variable fac [expr {wide(256)*wide(32)}]
	     variable x1 [expr {wide($mod*rand())}]
	     variable x2 [expr {wide($mod*rand())}]
	     variable x3 [expr {wide($mod*rand())}]
	
	     puts $mod
	 }
	
	 proc ::PRNG::marsaglia {} {
	     variable mod
	     variable fac
	     variable x1
	     variable x2
	     variable x3
	
	     set xn [expr {($fac*($x3+$x2+$x1))%$mod}]
	
	     set x1 $x2
	     set x2 $x3
	     set x3 $xn
	
	     return [expr {$xn/double($mod)}]
	 }

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain

