# TIP 311: Tcl/Tk 8.6 Release Calendar
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sourceforge.net>
	Author:         Larry W. Virden <lvirden@gmail.com>
	Author:         Joe Mistachkin <joe@mistachkin.com>
	Author:         Pat Thoyts <patthoyts@users.sourceforge.net>
	Author:         Miguel Sofer <msofer@users.sf.net>
	Author:         Lars Hellström <Lars.Hellstrom@residenset.net>
	Author:         Alexandre Ferrieux <alexandre.ferrieux@gmail.com>
	Author:         Arnulf Wiedemann <arnulf@wiedemann-pri.de>
	Author:         Trevor Davel <twylite@crypt.co.za>
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <dkf@users.sf.net>
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Informative
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        08-Jan-2008
	Post-History:   
-----

# Abstract

This TIP serves to coordinate Tcl/Tk 8.6 development releases and the features
they deliver.

# Introduction

Following up on a message to the 'tcl-core@lists.sourceforge.net' mailing
list, <http://aspn.activestate.com/ASPN/Mail/Message/tcl-core/3594952> , a
draft release calendar for Tcl/Tk 8.6 alpha and beta releases is presented
below.

The intent is for developers working on Tcl and Tk to add under each release
date those features they intend to make part of that release. For features
which already are described by another TIP, a reference to that TIP is
sufficient, and the recommended way to update this page. For features which
have not yet been TIPped, a brief description and the names of those actively
working on it are an acceptable temporary replacement, but should be replaced
with a TIP reference as soon as one is ready.

This is meant to be a working document, which gets updated by all stakeholders
to reflect ongoing progress and any changes of plan. It's not a contract or a
promise, just a place to record the intents of an entire community of
developers. Anything in it might be revised, and any intent expressed in it
might well not be fulfilled.  Due to its nature, there will never be any vote
on this TIP. It is more analogous to similar informational TIPs like [[31]](31.md).

# Release Calendar

## Tcl/Tk 8.6a1; Release Date: June 25, 2008

   * [[230]](230.md), Tcl Channel Transformation Reflection API

   * [[257]](257.md), Object Orientation for Tcl

   * [[285]](285.md), Script Cancellation with **interp cancel** and Tcl\_CancelEval

   * [[317]](317.md), Extend **binary** Ensemble with Binary Encodings

## Tcl/Tk 8.6a2; Release Date: August 25, 2008

   * [[304]](304.md), A Standalone **chan pipe** Primitive for Advanced Child IPC

   * NRE core. This is an internal change that allows infinite recursion and
     enables new features \(like **::tcl::unsupported::tailcall**\). Official
     API exposure was in later versions.

## Tcl/Tk 8.6a3; Release Date: October 10, 2008

   * [[195]](195.md), A Unique Prefix Handling Command

   * [[236]](236.md), Absolute Positioning of Canvas Items

   * [[265]](265.md), A Convenient C-side Command Option Parser for Tcl

   * [[308]](308.md), Tcl Database Connectivity \(TDBC\)

   * [[313]](313.md), Inexact Searching in Sorted List

   * [[314]](314.md), Ensembles with Parameters

   * [[315]](315.md), Add pathSeparator to tcl\_platform Array

   * [[316]](316.md), Portable Access Functions for Stat Buffers

   * [[318]](318.md), Extend Default Whitespace in **string trim** Beyond ASCII

   * [[320]](320.md), Improved Variable Handling in the Core Object System

   * [[323]](323.md), Do Nothing Gracefully

   * [[326]](326.md), Add **-stride** Option to **lsort**

   * [[327]](327.md), Proper Tailcalls

   * [[328]](328.md), Coroutines

   * [[330]](330.md), Eliminate interp->result from the Public Headers

   * [[331]](331.md), Allow **lset** to Extend Lists

## Tcl/Tk 8.6b1; Release Date: December 23, 2008

   * [[97]](97.md), Moving Vertices of Canvas Items

   * [[119]](119.md), Angled Text on a Canvas

   * [[197]](197.md), Unfocussed Text Widget Cursor Control

   * [[210]](210.md), Add **tempfile** Subcommand to **file**

   * [[234]](234.md), Add Support For Zlib Compression

   * [[307]](307.md), Make TclTransferResult\(\) Public

   * [[321]](321.md), Add a **tk busy** Command

   * [[322]](322.md), Publish the NRE API

   * [[324]](324.md), A Standard Dialog For Font Selection

   * [[329]](329.md), **Try**/**Catch**/**Finally** syntax

   * [[332]](332.md), Half-Close for Bidirectional Channels

   * [[335]](335.md), An API for Detecting Active Interpreters

   * [[336]](336.md), Supported Access To interp->errorline

   * [[337]](337.md), Make TclBackgroundException\(\) Public

   * [[338]](338.md), Embedder Access to Startup Scripts of \*\_Main\(\)

   * [[341]](341.md), Multiple **dict filter** Patterns

   * [[343]](343.md), A Binary Specifier for **format**/**scan**

## Tcl/Tk 8.6b2; Release Date: August 5, 2011

   * [[50]](50.md), Bundle [incr Tcl] with the Core Tcl distribution

	   > \* Note that this is Itcl-ng \(Itcl 4.0\), and it is done by the external
       packages mechanism.

   * [[162]](162.md), IPv6 Sockets for Tcl

   * [[171]](171.md), Change Default <MouseWheel> Bindings Behavior

   * [[244]](244.md), PNG Photo Image Support for Tk

   * [[348]](348.md), Substituted 'errorstack' / 'traceback'

   * [[353]](353.md), NR-enabled Expressions for Extensions

   * [[354]](354.md), Minor Production-Driven TclOO Revisions

   * [[356]](356.md), NR-enabled Substitutions for Extensions

   * [[357]](357.md), Export TclLoadFile

	   > \* Enables bundling of TDBC drivers with Tcl.

   * [[359]](359.md), Extended Window Manager Hint Support

	   > \* Note that this is also being backported to 8.5 and 8.4; it is in
       response to a change in expectations in third-party software.

   * [[360]](360.md), Modernize X11 Menus

   * [[362]](362.md), Simple 32 and 64 bit Registry Support

   * [[364]](364.md),
     Threading Support: Configuration and Package

   * [[381]](381.md), Call Chain Introspection and Control

## Tcl/Tk 8.6b3; Release Date: September 18, 2012

   * [[106]](106.md), Add Encoding Abilities to the [dde] Command

   * [[376]](376.md), Bundle sqlite3 and tdbc::sqlite3 Packages

   * [[378]](378.md), Fixing the Performance of [[280]](280.md)

   * [[380]](380.md), TclOO Slots for Flexible Declarations

   * [[382]](382.md), Let tk\_getSaveFile ignore file overwrites

   * [[388]](388.md), Extending Unicode literals past the BMP

   * [[395]](395.md), New 'string is entier' Command

   * [[396]](396.md), Symmetric Coroutines, Multiple Args, and yieldto

   * [[397]](397.md), Extensible Object Copying

   * [[398]](398.md), Quickly Exit with Non-Blocking Blocked Channels

   * [[403]](403.md), Web Colors for Tk

   * [[404]](404.md), Let Message Catalogs get the Locale from their File Name

## Tcl/Tk 8.6.0: Release Date: December 20, 2012

   * [[400]](400.md), Setting the Compression Dictionary and Other 'zlib' Updates

   * [[405]](405.md), Add Collecting Loops, the 'lmap' and 'dict map' Commands

   * [[413]](413.md), Unicode Support for 'string is space' and 'string trim'

   * [[416]](416.md), New Options for 'load' - -global and -lazy

### Pending Features

These have been voted in, but not yet implemented.

   * [[399]](399.md), Dynamic Locale Changing for msgcat

	   > \* May be superseded by [[412]](412.md) due to problems found with a lack of
       dynamism in this TIP's API.

These are currently on the schedule to make 8.6, though perhaps not 8.6.0.
[[406]](406.md) and [[412]](412.md) target co-distributed packages, not Tcl itself.

   * [[392]](392.md), Allow Bignums to be Disabled at Runtime on a Per-Interp Basis

	   > \* May make later versions than 8.6.0 and may be backported to 8.5.

   * [[406]](406.md), "C" is for Cookie

   * [[412]](412.md), Dynamic Locale Changing for msgcat with On-Demand File
     Load

	   > \* Replacement for [[399]](399.md).

# Work Roster

See the Wiki page, <http://wiki.tcl.tk/20966>

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

