# TIP 312: Add More Link Types
	Author:         Rene Zaumseil <r.zaumseil@freenet.de>
	Author:         Larry W. Virden <lvirden@yahoo.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        26-Jan-2008
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       variable,trace
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes adding a command, **Tcl\_LinkArray**, to allow linking of C
variables to Tcl lists. It also adds more types of linked variable.

# Rationale

The current C-API allows one to only link single variables. The proposed
_Tcl\_LinkArray_ function allows the linking of C-arrays to Tcl list
variables. If the given _size_ value is 1 then it works like the existing
_Tcl\_LinkVar_ function. The automatic creation of needed space when no
_address_ value is provided could be used for testing scenarios.

The new link types also allow one to link from strings and binary arrays to
fixed memory locations.

The use of arrays with a given _size > 1_ allows a safe and simple C-Tcl
connection. Array overwrites create errors.

# Specification

This document proposes the following changes to the Tcl core:

## New C API

Add a new public _Tcl\_LinkArray_ function to provide links of single
variable and array variables. The new function would have the same parameters
as the _Tcl\_LinkVar_ function, plus an additional _int size_. If the given
size is 1, then we have the same functionality as before. With _size_ > 1,
the linked Tcl variable is a list variable. If the given address is NULL then
the function allocates the necessary space on the C side itself.

 > int **Tcl\_LinkArray**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, const char \*_varName_,
   char \*_addr_, int _type_, int _size_\)

The following link types will be supported:

 > TCL\_LINK\_INT, TCL\_LINK\_DOUBLE, TCL\_LINK\_BOOLEAN, TCL\_LINK\_STRING,
   TCL\_LINK\_WIDE\_INT, TCL\_LINK\_CHAR, TCL\_LINK\_UCHAR, TCL\_LINK\_SHORT,
   TCL\_LINK\_USHORT, TCL\_LINK\_UINT, TCL\_LINK\_LONG, TCL\_LINK\_ULONG,
   TCL\_LINK\_FLOAT, TCL\_LINK\_WIDE\_UINT, TCL\_LINK\_CHARS, TCL\_LINK\_BINARY

Of these, TCL\_LINK\_CHARS and TCL\_LINK\_BINARY are new, and are as defined
below:

 TCL\_LINK\_CHARS: The address of the C variable is used as a _char \*_. The
   address remains always the same \(different to TCL\_LINK\_STRING\) and contains
   a \\0 terminated string. The \\0 counts towards the given _size_. The Tcl
   variable is used as a string and can contain up to _size -1_ characters.

 TCL\_LINK\_BINARY: The address of the C variable is used as a _unsigned char
   *_. The address remains always the same. Read and write operations must
   always contain the full sized binary string.

# Reference Implementation

See <https://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?aid=1992824> .

# Notes

The original TIP proposed a _link_ command to allow these things to be done
from the script level; this has been removed in the test suite support because
of concerns about safety and security.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

