# TIP 316: Portable Access Functions for Stat Buffers
	State:		Final
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.6
	Vote:		Done
	Post-History:	
	Author:		Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
	Created:	02-May-2008
-----

# Abstract

Tcl exposes the definition of the _struct stat_ type to users of its C API,
but this can vary between builds. This TIP proposes a set of portable
functions for reading \(portable\) fields out of those structures so that code
does not need to match the API version when reading the fields \(the most
common case by far\).

# Rationale

The _struct stat_ type used by Tcl can be one of many different types
depending on compile-time options \(as a consequence of 64-bit filesystem
support\). Tcl conceals these details by wrapping the type as a _Tcl\_StatBuf_
and providing a way to allocate these independently of compiler configuration.
However, there is no way to access the contents of the field without binding
to a particular type i.e. particular compile time configuration of Tcl \(and
not necessarily the extension code using the API!\)  This TIP proposes a set of
simple access functions to conceal these details and enable the portable
read-only use of the _Tcl\_StatBuf_ type.

# Proposed Change

This TIP proposes that the following functions will be defined. Each will take
a pointer to a _Tcl\_StatBuf_ as its only argument, and will return the
contents of the field indicated below.

 Tcl\_GetFSDeviceFromStat: Returns the _st\_dev_ field as an unsigned integer.

 Tcl\_GetFSInodeFromStat: Returns the _st\_ino_ field as an unsigned integer.

 Tcl\_GetModeFromStat: Returns the _st\_mode_ field as an unsigned integer.

 Tcl\_GetLinkCountFromStat: Returns the _st\_nlink_ field as an integer.

 Tcl\_GetUserIdFromStat: Returns the _st\_uid_ field as an integer.

 Tcl\_GetGroupIdFromStat: Returns the _st\_gid_ field as an integer.

 Tcl\_GetDeviceTypeFromStat: Returns the _st\_rdev_ field as an integer.

 Tcl\_GetAccessTimeFromStat: Returns the _st\_atime_ field as a wide integer.

 Tcl\_GetModificationTimeFromStat: Returns the _st\_mtime_ field as a wide
 integer.

 Tcl\_GetChangeTimeFromStat: Returns the _st\_ctime_ field as a wide integer.

 Tcl\_GetSizeFromStat: Returns the _st\_size_ field as an unsigned wide
 integer.

 Tcl\_GetBlocksFromStat: Returns the _st\_blocks_ field as an unsigned wide
 integer.

 Tcl\_GetBlockSizeFromStat: Returns the _st\_blksize_ field as an unsigned
 integer.

Some platforms may support other fields; these are not universal and are hence
not portable.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

