# TIP 32: Add Tcl_Obj-enabled counterpart to Tcl_CreateTrace
	Author:         David Cuthbert <dacut@kanga.org>
	Author:         Kevin Kenny <kennykb@acm.org>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        23-Mar-2001
	Post-History:   
	Discussions-To: news:comp.lang.tcl
	Keywords:       trace,Tcl_Obj
	Tcl-Version:    8.4a4
-----

# Abstract

This document proposes to add Tcl\_Obj support for trace procedures written
in C.

# Rationale

The _Tcl\_Obj_ system was introduced in version 8.0, making
computations \(potentially\) much more efficient by eliminating many
type conversions to and from strings.  However, the trace API
continues to require character strings in both command and variable
traces.

In addition, the _Tcl\_CreateTrace_ function interacts rather badly
with the bytecode compiler, since it forbids inlining of functions.
Since many trace applications ignore the built-in functions that would
have been inlined, this restriction is not needed by many
applications.  This TIP proposes to make it optional in the revised API.

The trace mechanism in the Tcl library has been underused for some
time, partly because it is awkward.  While the profiler, tracer and
debugger from TclX and the debugger from Expect have seen some limited
success, they are certainly not familiar to the majority of Tcl users.

The second author of this TIP has experimented with using the trace
mechanism to build a profiler for Tcl that does not depend on source
code instrumentation.  His experience was that:

  * It is very difficult to write useful trace procedures without
    resorting to _tclInt.h_ -- in particular, the fact that only the
    command name and not the _Tcl\_Command_ token is passed meant
    that _Tcl\_FindCommand_ is needed to do virtually anything
    useful.

  * The profiler often perturbs the run-time behavior of the program,
    often violently.  The reason is twofold.  First, the string
    representation of all of a traced command's arguments must be
    constructed, even though the trace procedure has no need for
    them.  Second, the presence of the trace procedure defeats the
    bytecode compiler.  Since the user of a profiler is unlikely to
    care about each individual built-in command \(the common usage is
    to profile the time spent in procedures\), turning off inline
    compilation of commands is neither needed nor wanted.

  * The profiler traces returns from commands by subsituting the
    command procedure with one that is internal to the profiler
    itself, and restoring the command procedure upon exit.  Doing so
    requires many needless lookups of the command name, because only
    the name is presented to the trace procedure, and the name is the
    only way to access _Tcl\_GetCommandInfo_ and
    _Tcl\_SetCommandInfo_.  This overhead can be avoided only by
    including _tclInt.h_ and casting the _Tcl\_Command_ object to a
    _Command_ object -- in other words, by accessing the
    interpreter's internal data structures from the extension.

This TIP is an effort to rationalize the trace interface to avoid
these difficulties.

# Specification

The following functions shall be added to the Tcl core:

 1. Tcl\_CreateObjTrace

		 Tcl_Trace Tcl_CreateObjTrace ( Tcl_Interp*          interp,
		                                int                  level, 
		                                int                  flags,
		                                Tcl_CmdObjTraceProc* objProc,
		                                ClientData           clientData );

	  > The _Tcl\_CreateObjTrace_ function adds a trace to the Tcl evaluator.
    The _interp_ argument is the Tcl interpreter for which tracing is
    being requested.  The _level_ argument is the maximum depth of
    recursive calls; when the execution depth of the interpreter exceeds
    this number, the trace callback does not execute.  The _objProc_
    argument is the callback procedure to execute each time a Tcl command
    is evaluated; it is expected to have arguments and result type that
    match _Tcl\_CmdObjTraceProc_ below.  The _clientData_ argument is
    client data to pass to the _objProc_ callback.  Finally, the
    _flags_ argument gives flags that control the tracing.  Initially,
    the only flag supported will be _TCL\_ALLOW\_INLINE\_COMPILE_.  If this
    flag is set, the bytecode compiler is permitted to compile in-line
    code for the Tcl built-in commands; any command that has been compiled
    in-line will not be traced.

	  > The _Tcl\_CreateObjTrace_ function returns a _trace token_ -- an
    object of opaque type that may be passed to _Tcl\_DeleteTrace_ to
    delete the trace.

	  > The _Tcl\_CmdObjTraceProc_ will have the following type signature.

		    typedef int Tcl_CmdObjTraceProc( ClientData     clientData,
		                                     Tcl_Interp*    interp,
		                                     int            level,
		                                     CONST char*    command,
		                                     Tcl_Command    commandInfo,
		                                     int            objc,
		                                     Tcl_Obj *CONST objv[] );

	 >  The _clientData_ parameter is the client data that was passed to
    _Tcl\_CreateObjTrace_.  The _interp_ parameter designates a Tcl
    interpreter.  The _level_ parameter specifies the execution level.
    The _command_ parameter gives the raw UTF-8 text of the command
    being evaluated, before any substitutions have been performed.  The
    _commandInfo_ parameter is an opaque _Tcl\_Command_ object that
    gives information about the command.  The _objc_ and _objv_
    parameters are the command name and parameter vector after
    substitution.

	  > The trace procedure is expected to return a standard Tcl status
    return.  If it returns _TCL\_OK_, the command is evaluated
    normally.  If it returns _TCL\_ERROR_, evaluation of the command
    does not take place.  The interpreter result is expected to
    contain an error message.  If it returns any other status, such as
    _TCL\_BREAK_, _TCL\_CONTINUE_ or _TCL\_RETURN_, it is treated
    as if the command had done so.

 1. Tcl\_GetCommandInfoFromToken and Tcl\_SetCommandInfoFromToken

		 int
		 Tcl_GetCommandInfoFromToken( Tcl_Command  token,
		                          Tcl_CmdInfo* infoPtr );

		 int
		 Tcl_SetCommandInfoFromToken( Tcl_Command        token,
		                          CONST Tcl_CmdInfo* infoPtr );

	  > The _Tcl\_GetCommandInfoFromToken_ and _Tcl\_SetCommandInfoFromToken_
    functions are precisely parallel to today's _Tcl\_GetCommandInfo_
    and _Tcl\_SetCommandInfo_ procedures, except that they accept an
    opaque _Tcl\_Command_ object instead of a command name.  They are
    provided so that trace procedures \(and other extensions that have
    such an object\) can adjust command information without having to
    go through two extra lookups in the command hash by applying
    _Tcl\_GetCommandInfo_ to the result of _Tcl\_GetCommandName._

# Change History

10 February 2002 - Moved to Final Status with slight revisions in the names
and arguments of Tcl\_GetCommandInfoFromToken and Tcl\_SetCommandInfoFromToken.

3 November 2001 - Reworked the entire TIP.  Changed the object trace
handling to work with _Tcl\_Command_ objects instead of command
names.  Removed the object-based variable trace procedures.  Since Tcl
variable names really are character strings and not Tcl objects,
object-based variable trace procedures would be _slower_ than the
string-based ones.

30 March 2001 - Changed return value of objProc to a Tcl\_Obj \* instead
of int \(and using the interpreter result to indicate an error\).  This
is more consistent with the current behavior \(but without the bug\).  -dac

# Copyright

Copyright © 2000 by David Cuthbert.  Distribution in whole or part,
with or without annotations, is unlimited.

Copyright © 2001 by Kevin B. Kenny.  Distribution in whole or part,
with or without annotations, is unlimited.

