# TIP 320: Improved Variable Handling in the Core Object System
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <dkf@users.sf.net>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        13-Jun-2008
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       TclOO
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
-----

# Abstract

This TIP specifies new configuration commands that allow variables to be used
in methods of the core object system without explicit declaration in each
method.

# Rationale

During the discussions leading up to the vote on [[257]](257.md), it became apparent
that being able to access at least some variables of an object without
explicit declaration in each method was desirable. Doing this would make
working with the core object system much easier in many common cases, and
would also allow for potentially more efficient implementation.

However, there is a balance to be drawn. If every variable of the object was
made available in the method by default \(the simplest case\) there would
frequently be problems with interactions between the formal arguments of a
superclass's methods and the instance variables of a subclass! That would be
highly undesirable, as it completely breaks the principle of isolation of
class implementations.

There are two ways of dealing with this issue.

 1. Make the variables understood by a particular class be distinct from those
    understood by subclasses of the class.

 2. Only bring those variables into scope that are actually declared by a
    particular class.

Studying the first alternative, there are two ways to actually achieve this:
not putting the variables in a namespace but actually using a separate
structure \(poor, because then we would lose the ability to easily use the
variable with many of Tcl's general variable facilities\), or modifying the
namespace-visible name of each variable to include some unique string coupled
to the class declaring it. Though I think that the second option is better
than the first \(actual implementations would be able to use the
**oo::object** class's **variable** and **varname** methods to hide many
of the details where they are currently exposed at all\) I still do not
particularly like it since it would mean that the cases where a class and a
subclass _want_ to refer to the same variable are very awkward.

Hence I think that there should be a mechanism for declaring what variables a
class has, that those names should be the namespace-visible names of the
variables, and that only those variables that are declared by a particular
class should be _automatically_ visible in the class's methods \(including
the constructor and destructor, of course\). As a matter of basic symmetry,
object-level declarations of variables and methods should also be possible.

# Proposed Change

Every object and every class will have associated with it a list of variable
names. This list will be configurable via a subcommand of **oo::define** and
introspectable. Methods \(strictly, only procedure-like methods, constructors
and destructors\) will then make those variables that were declared at the same
declaration level \(i.e. in the same class, or in the object itself for methods
defined on the object\) available in the method body without further
declaration or qualification. At declaration time, the type of the variable
\(i.e. whether it is an array or a simple variable\) will not be defined; that
may be done in the constructor. As there is no \(public\) C API for declaring a
procedure-like method, there will not be a public C API for declaring the
variables either.

Note that the order in which the declaration of some methods and some
variables for a class or object will not matter.

## Declaration

The **oo::define** and **oo::objdefine** \(and also the **self**
subcommand of **oo::define**\) will gain a new subcommand: **variable**.
This will take zero or more arguments, and those arguments will form the list
of variables that are made available by default. Each argument will need to be
a valid variable local name without parentheses.

Syntax \(other uses analogous according to normal behaviour of the class and
object definition commands\):

 > **oo::define** _class_ **variable** ?_varName ..._?

## Introspection

The list of variables declared by a particular class, _class_, may be
retrieved by:

 > **info class variables** _class_

The list of variables declared by a particular object, _object_, may be
retrieved by:

 > **info object variables** _object_

Note that the full list of _all_ variables \(matching an optional pattern\) in
an object's namespace will be retrievable using **info object vars**; this
mechanism is disjoint \(though **info object variables** will return
variables that can be returned by **info object vars**\).

# Implementation

<https://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?aid=2005460>

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

