# TIP 322: Publish the NRE API
	Author:         Miguel Sofer <msofer@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        13-Jul-2008
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
-----

# Abstract

This TIP exposes an API to allow extension writers to take advantage of Tcl's
Non-Recursive evaluation Engine.

# Rationale

NRE \(for **N**on-**R**ecursive **E**ngine\) is a trampoline
implementation for command evaluation and bytecode execution that massively
reduce Tcl's footprint on the C stack. It is conceptually related to stackless
Python.

NRE is fully backwards compatible with script and C extensions and has already
been committed to HEAD. Extensions that use the normal Tcl API run properly
but cannot take advantage of the non-recursivity.

This TIP proposes to publish a small API for extension writers that will allow
them to exploit the new possibilities.

# Functions to be Exported

The first two functions permit the creation of NRE-enabled commands.
**Tcl\_NRCreateCommand** creates a command that implements an NRE interface
_nreProc_. As every command needs also a regular _objProc_, the function
**Tcl\_NRCallObjProc** is provided as a utility permitting a relatively
simple way to generate the _objProc_ from the _nreProc_.

   * Tcl\_Command **Tcl\_NRCreateCommand**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, const char
     *_cmdName_, Tcl\_ObjCmdProc \*_proc_, Tcl\_ObjCmdProc \*_nreProc_,
     ClientData _clientData_, Tcl\_CmdDeleteProc \*_deleteProc_\)

   * int **Tcl\_NRCallObjProc**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_ObjCmdProc
     *_objProc_, ClientData _clientData_, int _objc_, Tcl\_Obj \*const
     *_objv_[]\)

The next three functions provide the API to request an evaluation by the
trampoline, after the caller returned:

   * int **Tcl\_NREvalObj**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Obj \*_objPtr_, int
     _flags_\)

   * int **Tcl\_NREvalObjv**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, int _objc_, Tcl\_Obj
     *const _objv_[], int _flags_\)

   * int **Tcl\_NRCmdSwap**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Command _cmd_, int
     _objc_, Tcl\_Obj \*const _objv_[]\)

Finally, there is a function to register a callback that the trampoline has
to execute right after a requested evaluation, typically used for cleanup.

   * void **Tcl\_NRAddCallback**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_NRPostProc
     *_postProcPtr_, ClientData _data0_, ClientData _data1_, ClientData
     _data2_, ClientData _data3_\)

# Documentation

NRE's internal functioning is somewhat documented at
<http://msofer.com:8080/wiki?name=NRE>

An example of how the API is to be used can be found at
<http://msofer.com:8080/wiki?name=Exploiting\+NRE>

The new API will be documented in a manual page _doc/NRE.3_.

# Reference Implementation

The API is already available in HEAD \(to become Tcl8.6a2\); a high level
description is available at
<http://msofer.com:8080/wiki?name=NRE\+short\+explanation>

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

