# TIP 325: System Tray and System Notification Access
	Author:		David N. Welton <davidw@dedasys.com>, Kevin Walzer <kw@codebykevin.com>
	State:		Final
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Vote:		Done
	Vote-Summary:   Accepted 5/0/0
	Votes-For:      SL, JN, MC, FV, KW
	Votes-Against:  none
	Votes-Present:  none
	Created:	25-Aug-2008
	Post-History:	
	Keywords:	Tk, desktop integration
-----

# Abstract

Modern operating systems have a "system tray", where programs may place an
icon to indicate program status. This TIP proposes that Tk should adopt some
existing code in order to permit cross platform access to this functionality. 
This TIP also proposes to implement system notification windows, which have become 
popular across all platforms.

# Design

 * Windows: winico

 * X11: tktray

 * Mac: New development

Existing code from the winico and tktray extension packages has been refactored and ported into Tk's core; this code utilizes an acceptable license in order to repurpose it for a systray command. The sysnotify command will be a new implementation. On Windows and Mac it will make use of native system API's, and on X11 it will include a conditional dependency on libnotify, falling back to a pure-Tcl implementation (derived from the "notifywindow" tklib package) if libnotify is not present. 

Both the tk systray and the tk sysnotify commands will present a script-level public API implementing the proposed interface, outlined below.

# Systray Interface

 > **tk systray create** _-image_ _image_ _?-text_ _text?_ _?-button1_ _callback?_ _?-button3_ _callback?_ 

Creates a new icon for the system tray with a Tk image, a string for display in a tooltip, and callbacks that fire on a Button-1  or Button-3 event.

> **tk systray configure** _?option?_ _?value option value ...?_

Modifies either the image, text string, or callback (Button-1 or Button-3).

> **tk systray destroy**

Removes the icon from the systray.

# Sysnotify Interface

> **tk sysnotify** _title_ _message_ 

Creates and display a system notification with a title and body message.

# Example

systray:

    image create photo book -data R0lGODlhDwAPAKIAAP//////AP8AAMDAwICAgAAAAAAAAAAAACwAAAAADwAPAAADSQhA2u5ksPeKABKSCaya29d4WKgERFF0l1IMQCAKatvBJ0OTdzzXI1xMB3TBZAvATtB6NSLKleXi3OBoLqrVgc0yv+DVSEUuFxIAOw==

    tk systray create -image book -text "Systray sample" -button1 {puts "Here is the systray output"} -button3 {puts "here is another example"}

sysnotify:

    tk sysnotify "Alert" "This is just a test of the Tk System Notification Code."

# Implementation 

A draft implementation is currently under development in the tip_325 branch.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
