# TIP 327: Proper Tailcalls
	Author:         Miguel Sofer <msofer@users.sf.net>
	Author:         David S. Cargo <escargo@skypoint.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        20-Sep-2008
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       tailcall,NRE
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
-----

# Abstract

This TIP recommends adding proper tailcalls to Tcl.

# Proposal

We propose to add a new command:

 > **tailcall** _cmd_ ?_arg ..._?

The command can only be invoked in a procedure or lambda body.

The effect of this command is very similar to:

 > **return [uplevel 1 [list [namespace which** _cmd_ **]**
   ?_arg ..._?**]]**

with the sole exception that the invocation of _cmd_ happens _after_ the
currently executing body returns and is not visible in Tcl's call stack.

# Rationale

The new Non-Recursive Engine \(NRE\) implemented in Tcl 8.6 allows support for a
number of interesting features that have previously been difficult or
impossible to implement efficiently in Tcl. One such feature is support for
_proper tailcalls_, an important feature for functional-style programming.
The new command allows unbounded recursion and enables programming in
_continuation passing style_.

# Effect on Tcl's Call Stack

**tailcall** is implemented as a new command, as opposed to an optimization
that would be done automatically by the bytecode compiler, due to the effect
it has on Tcl's call stack.

Consider the following example:

	 proc showStack {} {
	     set depth [info frame]
	     set res {}
	     for {set i 1} {$i <= $depth} {incr i} {
	 	lappend res [info frame $i]
	     }
	     return $res
	 }
	 
	 proc one cmd {join [$cmd] \n}
	 proc two {} {uplevel 1 showStack}
	 proc three {} {tailcall showStack}

When run at the interactive prompt, we obtain

	 % one two
	 type eval line 1 cmd {one two} level 2
	 type proc line -1 cmd {$cmd} proc ::one level 1
	 type proc line 1 cmd {uplevel 1 showStack} proc ::two
	 type eval line 1 cmd showStack proc ::two
	 type proc line 5 cmd {info frame $i} proc ::showStack level 0
	 % one three
	 type eval line 1 cmd {one three} level 2
	 type proc line -1 cmd {$cmd} proc ::one level 1
	 type proc line 5 cmd {info frame $i} proc ::showStack level 0
	 % 

Remark how **tailcall** completely removed the proc _three_ from Tcl's
call stack. This effect is also apparent on error traces.

# Implementation

An experimental implementation of tailcalls is available in Tcl 8.6a2 in CVS
on sourceforge, in the ::tcl::unsupported namespace.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

