# TIP 332: Half-Close for Bidirectional Channels
	Author:         Alexandre Ferrieux <alexandre.ferrieux@gmail.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        25-Sep-2008
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl,channel,close,socket,shutdown
	Obsoletes:      301
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to extend the **close**/**chan close** commands to let
them perform an unidirectional "half-close" on bidirectional channels.

# Background

Bidirectional channels \(sockets and command pipelines\) allow Tcl to make an
efficient use of a "filter process", by exchanging data back and forth over an
abstract "single" channel.

However, this single channel abstraction comes with a too coarse-grained
**close** primitive. Indeed, it closes both directions simultaneously, while
it is often desirable to close "gracefully" the half-connection _to_ the
filter process, leaving the return path open. The effect of such a half-close
is that the filter receives a bona fide EOF alone, without a nearly
simultaneous SIGPIPE on its write end if it happens to be writing at that
time. Moreover, if the filter is itself comprised of a pipeline of processes,
some of which doing buffered I/O, then this graceful EOF may be the only way
of flushing the chain and receiving back precious data.

This technique is supported by all modern OSes: for pipes there are actually
two separate file descriptors/handles, and it suffices to close\(\) the write
side; for sockets, a single fd is used, but a specific syscall, shutdown\(\),
brings back the ability to half-close. Hence it is fairly natural for a
universal "OS glove" like Tcl to expose this universal feature.

# Proposed Change

This TIP proposes to extend the **close** and twin brother **chan close**
commands to take an optional extra "direction" argument, indicating a
half-close on the substream going in that direction:

 > **close** _channel_ ?**read**\|**write**?

When the extra direction argument \(which may be abbreviated\) is given, first
the OS-level half-close is performed: this means a shutdown\(\) on a socket, and
a close\(\) of one end of a pipe for a command pipeline. Then, the Tcl-level
channel data structure is either kept or freed depending on whether the other
direction is still open:

		set f [open |command r+]
		...
		close $f w ;# $f still exists
		...
		close $f r ;# now $f is gone

Also, a single-argument **close** on an already half-closed bi-channel is
defined to just "finish the job", which allows to write blind cleanup
procedures easily:

		if {[catch {
		  set f [open |command r+]
		  ...
		  close $f w
		  ...
		} err]} {
		  ...
		  close $f ;# close what's left
		}

In the case of a command pipeline, the child-reaping duty falls upon the
shoulders of the last close or half-close, so that an error condition at this
stage \(like "Child exited abnormally"\) doesn't leak system resources.

Last, a half-close on an already closed half raises an error:

		set [open |command r+]
		close $f w
		close $f w
		==> channel "file3" wasn't opened for writing

And the same applies to wrong-sided unidirectional channels:

		set [open filename r]
		close $f w
		==> channel "file3" wasn't opened for writing

# Rationale

The concept has gone full circle. From an initial half-close proposal very
close to the current one, an ambitious **chan split** generalization was
born in the surrounding enthusiasm, and specified in [[301]](301.md). Then, [[304]](304.md)'s
**chan pipe** was accepted, which addressed most of the "splitting" demand
\(asymmetric fconfigures on both ends of a command pipeline can be done by
redirecting to a standalone pipe\). Moreover, in hindsight it appears that the
implementation of [[301]](301.md) had very long-ranging effects on various channel
implementations, which are more numerous today than before \(TLS, reflection
API\).

As a consequence, [[301]](301.md) is being withdrawn, and the current TIP goes back to
its initial, lower profile: just provide the half-close.

# C Interface

Luckily, the polymorphic channel API in Tcl has been fitted with a half-close function for nearly 10 years \(!\): the Tcl\_ChannelType structure has had a _close2proc_ member since 1998 in order to avoid deadlocks when closing a command pipeline. As a consequence, the implementation of half-close can be done with a constant channel ABI, avoiding any compatibility issue for extensions.

Still, the _close2proc_ member does not have public status. To promote symmetry between the script-level and public C APIs, this TIP proposes to add an entry in the main stub table with the following signature:

   > int **Tcl\_CloseEx**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, Tcl\_Channel _chan_, int _flags_\)

The behavior being defined as mirrorring the script-level semantics described bove, where _flags_ is either 0 \(meaning bidirectional close\) or one of TCL\_CLOSE\_READ and TCL\_CLOSE\_WRITE \(meaning half-close\).

# Reference Implementation

See Patch 219159 <https://sourceforge.net/tracker/index.php?func=detail&aid=219159&group_id=10894&atid=310894> .

After a discussion with Andreas Kupries, the plan is to half-close-enable only raw \(unstacked\) channels for the time being, raising an explicit error when trying a half-close on a non-bottom channel. This leaves time to carefully design the necessary API extension of the generic stacking and reflection layers, while preparing a fully compatible change \(error cases becoming valid\).

On the channel-type-dependent side, only sockets and pipelines will be half-close-enabled for now: these are assumed to represent the most pressing demand.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

