# TIP 336: Supported Access To interp->errorline
	Author:		Don Porter <dgp@users.sf.net>
	State:		Final
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Done
	Created:	21-Oct-2008
	Post-History:	
	Tcl-Version:	8.6
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-330-336
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a supported public interface to set and get the value of the
_errorLine_ field of the _Tcl\_Interp_ data structure.

# Background

A more forceful barrier to direct access to the _result_ and _freeProc_
fields of the _Tcl\_Interp_ data structure has just been accepted [[330]](330.md). This
revision leaves only the _errorLine_ field still normally publicly visible.
The visibility of this field prevents the realization of _Tcl\_Interp_ as a
fully opaque data structure.

The _result_ and _freeProc_ fields have long had the recommended
alternatives of **Tcl\_GetStringResult** and **Tcl\_SetResult** which make
direct access unnecessary. The _errorLine_ field has long gone without such
alternatives. Starting with Tcl 8.5, some alternatives do exist. The value of
the _errorLine_ field can be set by passing an appropriate dictionary to
**Tcl\_SetReturnOptions** and the value can be retrieved from the dictionary
returned by passing **TCL\_ERROR** to **Tcl\_GetReturnOption** [[227]](227.md). The
housekeeping burden of these alternatives is significant, so there's little
attraction for replacing direct access to the _errorLine_ field with them.

Specialized routines already exist for managing the fully private fields
_errorInfo_ and _errorCode_ in the opaque part of the _Interp_ data
structure, **Tcl\_SetErrorCode**, **Tcl\_AddErrorInfo**, etc. The management
of these values is needed frequently enough to make simplified alternatives
like this worthwhile.

# Proposal

Create the following new public routines to get and set the _errorLine_
field:

 > int **Tcl\_GetErrorLine**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_\)

 > void **Tcl\_SetErrorLine**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, int _value_\)

These will be implemented as \(equivalent to\):

	int Tcl_GetErrorLine(Tcl_Interp *interp) {
	    return ((Interp *) interp)->errorLine;
	}
	
	void Tcl_SetErrorLine(Tcl_Interp *interp, int value) {
	    ((Interp *) interp)->errorLine = value;
	}

In addition, following the example of [[330]](330.md), disable the default public access
to the _errorLine_ field, permitting the restoration of access only when the
**USE\_INTERP\_ERRORLINE** directive is defined.

# Compatibility

This change is a source incompatibility with C code directly accessing the
_errorLine_ field. The quick fix to restore compatibility is to define
**USE\_INTERP\_ERRORLINE**. The next step for migrating old code would be to
adopt the new routines, and offer macros to duplicate the effect of the new
routines when older Tcl headers are in use.

# Rationale

This is the last stepping stone to prepare the way for _Tcl\_Interp_ to
become a fully opaque data structure. The rationale for the immediate
disabling of public access is to \(over?\)learn the lesson of [[330]](330.md). No matter
how sternly you warn about deprecation, nothing happens until you turn it off,
so let's move immediately to turning it off, with the burden on the users to
restore what they need.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

