# TIP 339: Case-Insensitive Package Names
	Author:         Andreas Kupries <andreask@activestate.com>
	State:          Rejected
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        14-Nov-2008
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
-----

# Abstract

This document proposes to change the package management facilities of the Tcl
core to handle package names in a case-insensitive manner, switching back to
case-sensitive operation if and only if explicitly requested by the user. The
case of package names is preserved in the storage however.

# Rationale

The package management facilities of Tcl are an area where the user of
packages is currently burdened with more ... than is convenient or easy. A big
problem is that Tcl compares package names case-sensitively. This means that
_Expect_ and _expect_ are two different things to Tcl. In the real world
however having two packages using the same name but different capitalization
is extremely rare.

Yet the user of Tcl package facilities has to remember whatever ecclectic
capitalization the package creator has chosen.

Changing this, i.e. having Tcl's package management go to case-insensitive
comparison, will lift this burden and make things easier, as it is not
necessary anymore to get the capitalization right. Most people will likely
simply start to write all package names lower-case after this change.

# Specification

## Script Level

The only command affected by the proposed change is **package**. More
specifically, its sub-commands _ifneeded_, _present_, _require_, and
_versions_.

In detail

 * **package require** _name_ ...

	 > This sub-command is changed to accept an additional option _-strict_.

	 > If this option is present the sub-command performs an old-style, i.e.
   case-sensitive search for the package _name_.

	 > Otherwise the command is changed to disregard case during the search for
   _name_. In that case it is possible that multiple packages are found
   which have the same name, just with different capitalizations. To resolve
   this conflict the command will load the package in the matching set which
   was added first to its memory database via **package ifneeded**.

	 > If that resolves to the wrong package the user has to use _-strict_ and
   specify the exact name of the package required, capitalization and all.
   Given our rationale for the TIP this should be required seldomly.

 * **package present** ?-exact? _name_ ?_version_?

	 > This sub-command is changed to accept an additional option _-strict_.

	 > If this option is present the sub-command performs an old-style, i.e.
   case-sensitive search for the package _name_.

	 > Otherwise the command is changed to disregard case during the search for
   _name_. In that case it is possible that multiple packages are found
   which have the same name, just with different capitalizations. To resolve
   this conflict the command will return the version of the package in the
   matching set it found first among the loaded packages.

	 > If that resolves to the wrong package the user has to use _-strict_ and
   specify the exact name of the package to look for, capitalization and all.
   Given our rationale for the TIP this should be required seldomly.

 * **package versions** _name_

	 > This sub-command is changed to accept an additional option _-strict_.

	 > If this option is present the sub-command performs an old-style, i.e.
   case-sensitive search for the package _name_.

	 > Otherwise the command is changed to disregard case during the search for
   _name_. In that case it is possible that multiple packages are found
   which have the same name, just with different capitalizations. To resolve
   this conflict the command will return the version of the package in the
   matching set which was added first to its memory database via **package
   ifneeded**.

	 > If that resolves to the wrong package the user has to use _-strict_ and
   specify the exact name of the package to query, capitalization and all.
   Given our rationale for the TIP this should be required seldomly.

 * **package forget** _name_ ...

	 > This sub-command is changed to accept an additional option _-strict_.

	 > If this option is present the sub-command performs an old-style, i.e.
   case-sensitive search for the package _name_ to forget.

	 > Otherwise the command is changed to disregard case during the search for
   _name_. In that case it is possible that multiple packages are found
   which have the same name, just with different capitalizations. Instead of
   resolving the conflict by forgetting only the first package found among the
   loaded this command will forget **all** of the packages matching the
   name.

	 > If that does more than intended the user has to use _-strict_ and specify
   the exact name\(s\) of the package to forget, capitalization and all. Given
   our rationale for the TIP this should be required seldomly.

 * **package provide** _name_ _version_

	 > This form of the command is left unchanged.

 * **package provide** _name_

	 > This form of the command is like **package present**, except for the
   different handling of a package not in memory. It is therefore changed in
   the same manner, i.e:

	 > This form of the sub-command is changed to accept an additional option
   _-strict_.

	 > If this option is present this form of the sub-command performs an
   old-style, i.e. case-sensitive search for the package _name_ before
   returning its version, or the empty string if nothing was found.

	 > Otherwise this form of the sub-command is changed to disregard case during
   the search for _name_. In that case it is possible that multiple packages
   are found which have the same name, just with different capitalizations. To
   resolve this conflict the command will return the version of the package in
   the matching set it found first among the loaded packages.

	 > If that resolves to the wrong package the user has to use _-strict_ and
   specify the exact name of the package to look for, capitalization and all.
   Given our rationale for the TIP this should be required seldomly.

 * **package ifneeded** _name_ _version_ _script_

	 > This form of the command is left unchanged. It keeps storing the package
   name as given, preserving capitalization, and _package provide_ searches
   case-sensitively. This means that the name used by **provide** has to
   match the name used by the **ifneeded**, just like the version numbers
   have to match. While we are working on easing the load on the user of a
   package with regard to letter case we do assume that the developer of a
   package does know how it is spelled, capitalization and all, therefore a
   strict, case-sensitive search is best to detect such avoidable mismatches.

 * **package ifneeded** _name_ _version_

	 > This form of the command is similar to **package present** or **package
   provide**. It is therefore changed in the same manner, i.e:

	 > This form of the sub-command is changed to accept an additional option
   _-strict_.

	 > If this option is present this form of the sub-command performs an old-style, i.e.
   case-sensitive search for the package _name_ before returning the script, or
   the empty string if nothing was found.

	 > Otherwise this form of the sub-command is changed to disregard case during the
   search for _name_. In that case it is possible that multiple packages are
   found which have the same name, just with different capitalizations, and the
   same version. To resolve this conflict the command will return the script of the
   package in the matching set it found first among the loaded packages.

	 > If that resolves to the wrong package the user has to use _-strict_ and specify
   the exact name of the package to look for, capitalization and all. Given our
   rationale for the TIP this should be required seldomly.

## C API

At the C-level the only functions to consider are

 * Tcl\_PkgPresent

 * Tcl\_PkgPresentEx

 * Tcl\_PkgRequire

 * Tcl\_PkgRequireEx

 * Tcl\_PkgRequireProc

The first four of these currently have an integer \(boolean\) argument
_exact_. This argument is changed to an integer \(bitset\) _flags_, with the
original exact value residing in bit 0. The strictness of the package name
comparison is encoded in bit 1. For easy access to the flags we define

	 #define TCL_PKG_EXACT  1  /* Exact version required */
	 #define TCL_PKG_STRICT 2  /* Use strict (case-sensitive) package name
	                            * comparison */

This change relies on the assumption that all \(most\) existing users of these
functions use the constants 0 and 1 for _exact_, making them fully backward
compatible.

The last function, _Tcl\_PkgRequireProc_, has no arguments we can modify in
this manner. Its behaviour is changed to perform case-insensitive searches, as
specified above for the associated subcommands of **package**, and a new
function is added for access to the old behaviour, i.e. case-sensitive
searches. This new function is

 * Tcl\_PkgRequireProcEx

It has the same signature as its pre-TIP counterpart, except that a _flags_
argument is added after the clientData. This argument recognizes
_TCL\_PKG\_STRICT_ as defined above and uses it to switch between
case-insensitive and strict search. The old _Tcl\_PkgRequireProc_ is
reimplemented in terms of _Tcl\_PkgRequireProcEx_.

## Unknown handlers

The contract between the package management facilities in the Tcl core and the
handler commands registered with _package unknown_ is amended. The handler has
to perform case-insensitive search for the package whose name it is invoked with.

## Discussions

The contract for the package unknown handler is amended because not doing so would
force the package management facilities in the Tcl core to search for a package by
iterating over all possible combinations of upper/lower case in the package name.
For a name containing N alphabetic characters \(i.e. not counting ':'s, and digits\)
this means to loop 2\*\*N times. This exponentional explosion and consequent running
time is not acceptable \(The longest name for a package currently found in
ActiveState's public TEApot repository is 25 alpabetic characters, forcing over
30 million searches before the core can give up\).

Further, of the two known standard package unknown handlers the handler for regular
packages need not be modified at all as it always register every possible package
it finds. Only the unknown handler for Tcl Modules has to be modified to perform
case insensitive filesystem searches, and only for Unix. On Windows the builtin
**glob** command already perform such.

# Reference Implementation

An implementation patch is available at SourceForge
<http://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?aid=2316115> .

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

Please note that any correspondence to the author concerning this TIP is
considered in the public domain unless otherwise specifically requested by the
individual\(s\) authoring said correspondence. This is to allow information
about the TIP to be placed in a public forum for discussion.

