# TIP 34: Modernize TEA Build System
	Author:         Mo DeJong <supermo@bayarea.net>
	Author:         Andreas Kupries <andreas_kupries@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Withdrawn
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        03-May-2001
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
-----

# Abstract

A number of things in the original TEA specification and documentation
have fallen out of date.  Numerous complaints about the difficulty of
creating a TEA compliant package have appeared on news:comp.lang.tcl.
Other complaints about the ease of building Tcl and Tk using the
autoconf based build system have also surfaced.  Addressing these
concerns is made even more difficult by the fact that two independent
build systems currently exist, one for UNIX, and one for Windows.
Maintaining multiple build systems is a frustratingly slow process
that wastes time better spent on other issues.  In addition, the Tcl
build scripts do not support cross compilation which makes the
maintenance process even slower since one can't test simple build
system changes for a given platform without access to that platform.
This document describes how these concerns can be addressed.

# Documentation

As new software is released, existing documentation becomes obsolete.
Some of the existing TEA documentation is now so badly out of date
that suggested software releases are no longer available.  For
example, the TEA based build for Windows requires Cygwin, yet there is
a lack of clear instructions that describe how to install Cygwin.  The
solution to this problem is simple, the TEA documentation and
implementation must be updated.

# Platform Detection

Most open source packages make use of a pair of scripts called
_config.guess_ and _config.sub_ to detect a platform specific
configuration string.  For example, running _config.guess_ on an x86
Linux box might print:

	% ./config.guess
	i686-pc-linux-gnu

This value can be accessed from the configure.in script by adding a
call to the _AC\_CANONICAL\_HOST\(\)_ macro.  One would then detect a
specific platform by doing a switch on the value of the $host
variable.  Tcl currently detects the build platform by examining the
results of running _\`uname -s\`-\`uname -r\`_.  Tcl should use the
_config.guess_ and _config.sub_ method of platform detection.
This may not seem like a big change at first but it has quite a few
ramifications.

This change cannot be made incrementally, so there is a real danger of
breaking the build for configurations that currently work.  For this
reason, it would be a good idea to wait until a 8.4 release branch has
been created before adding such a change to the CVS HEAD.  The cross
compiling section will describe some of the other maintenance benefits
that can be realized by using _config.sub_ and _config.guess_.

# Cross Compiling

Tcl's build system has never supported cross compiling.  The use of
uname instead of _config.guess_ during platform detection is largely
to blame for this.  A configure script that makes use of the
_AC\_CANONICAL\_HOST\(\)_ macro keeps track of two separate
configuration variables, _build_ and _host_.  The _build_
variable holds the configuration string for the platform running the
_./configure_ script.  The _host_ variable holds the configuration
string for the platform the generated binaries will be run on.  For
example, if one were to build a Windows binary under Linux the
_build_ variable could be set to _i686-pc-linux-gnu_ and the
_host_ variable could be set to _i386-pc-mingw32msvc_.

Using the host variable instead of the output of _uname_ has another
important benefit.  The build system maintainer can often test out
changes to the build system logic without having access to the system
in question.  This is important since a surprising number of "broken
builds" are the result of stupid logic or syntax errors in the sh code
for a particular platform.  For example, one could test out the
Windows build using a cross compiler prefixed by _i386-mingw32msvc_
like so:

	% ./configure --host=i386-mingw32msvc
	% make

The above commands will run the Windows configure script in bash and
then generate Win32 .dll and .exe files.  One can even create cross
compilers for multiple systems.  Binaries for Solaris, IRIX, or others
can be created under Linux or even Windows.  The attentive reader will
note that even compiling a Win32 application under Cygwin is
technically a cross compile since the generated executable would be
run with the Win32 runtime instead of the Cygwin runtime.  To properly
support cross compiling and make it easy for the end user, an upgrade
to autoconf is also required.

# Autoconf 2.50 Update

The autoconf 2.13 release is now several years old.  The most recent
stable release of autoconf is 2.50.  A huge number of problems have
been fixed in the autoconf 2.50 release, the most important of which
is cross compiling support.  Cross compiling with autoconf 2.13 is
possible but far harder than it needs to be.  The long and sordid
history of this particular feature in autoconf will not be addressed
in this document.  It is safe to say that the autoconf 2.50 release is
the first release to make cross compiling easy for the end user.  The
existing build system works with the autoconf 2.50 release on a number
of systems, but it is possible that the build on some system would be
broken by this upgrade.  For this reason, the autoconf 2.50 upgrade
should happen after an 8.4 branch has been created.

# Use a Config Header

Autoconf supports two ways to set platform specific flags set via the
_AC\_DEFINE\(\)_ macro.  Tcl currently makes use of the default option.
Each call to _AC\_DEFINE\(\)_ adds a _-DVAR=1_ value that is passed
into the compiler.  These _-D_ flags are also included in the
generated _tclConfig.sh_ file so that extensions will use the same
set of defines.  The second option is to generate a .h file that will
be \#included into any needed header or source file.  This file could be
called _tclconfig.h_.  Instead of passing _-DVAR=1_ on the command
line, the generated .h file might look like:

	# define VAR 1

There is no functional difference between these two options.  The
benefit of using _tclconfig.h_ will likely only be realized by the
maintainers or people hacking on the core and extensions.  By taking
the -D flags out of the _Makefile_, we make it easier to hack around
in the generated .h file without having to worry about also changing
the flags in the generated _tclConfig.sh_ file.  It can be quite a
pain to change an option in Tcl's _Makefile_, then again in the
_tclConfig.sh_ file, and then rerun the configure script in each
extension.  This pain can be avoided by adding a call to
_AM\_CONFIG\_HEADER\(tclconfig.h\)_ to the top of Tcl's _configure.in_
script.  One possible ramification of this change may be the need to
install _tclconfig.h_ in the event items in _tclInt.h_ depend on
\#defines in _tclconfig.h_.

# Misplaced AC\_SUBST Calls

The _configure.in_ file for both Tcl and Tk invokes the
_AC\_SUBST\(\)_ macro for each variable that is to be substituted into
the _Makefile_.  This makes sense for variables defined in the
_configure.in_ file, but it makes no sense for those variables
defined in _tcl.m4_.  Invoking _AC\_SUBST\(\)_ in _configure.in_
for a variable defined in _tcl.m4_ means that the maintainer will
need to keep track of the variable in Tcl's _configure.in_ as well
as the _configure.in_ of any extension that uses the given variable.
This simply makes no sense.  Each macro defined in _tcl.m4_ should
call _AC\_SUBST\(\)_ for any variables it wishes to substitute into
generated files.

# One Rule to Build Them All

Perhaps the most frustrating thing about maintaining Tcl's build
system is the fact that each and every modification needs to be made
and tested in at least 4 configurations.  This is because Tcl and Tk
have two separate build systems, one for Unix and one for Windows.
Each and every change needs to be tested on Unix for both Tcl and Tk
and then again on Windows for both Tcl and Tk.  It is an incredible
waste of time.

A single build system with properly abstracted macros can be used to
build both a Unix and Windows version of Tcl.  Changes would still
need to be tested on each platform, but dealing with only one source
base would save a significant amount of the maintainer's time.

A related problem is experienced by extension authors.  It can be
quite difficult to write a build system for an extension that works
with both the Unix and Windows version of Tcl.  Here is a telling
quote from Todd Helfter, the maintainer of the Oratcl extension.

 > _"TEA specifies that there should be only one set of configure
   files.  Why should extension writers have to comply with a standard
   that Tcl nor Tk does not?"_

For starters, some of the variables defined in the Unix version of
_tclConfig.sh_ do not exist in the Windows version.  Most of the
obvious problems in this area have already been corrected in the 8.4
release, but some difficult ones remain.  For example, how would an
extension author figure out how to name a generated library file in a
cross platform way?  One would assume that a couple of variables could
be concatenated together, but in practice this is not so easy.  A
quick look at the _configure.in_ scripts will turn up examples like
this:

\(Unix version\)

	if test "${SHARED_BUILD}" = "1" ; then
	  eval "TCL_LIB_FILE=libtcl${TCL_SHARED_LIB_SUFFIX}"
	else
	  eval "TCL_LIB_FILE=libtcl${TCL_UNSHARED_LIB_SUFFIX}"
	fi

\(Windows version\)

	eval "TCL_LIB_FILE=${LIBPREFIX}tcl$VER${LIBSUFFIX}"

The attentive reader will note that these are completely different!
To understand the Unix version, one has to go exploring to find out
how _TCL\_[UN]SHARED\_LIB\_SUFFIX_ gets set.  To understand the Windows
version, one needs to look into the origins of _LIBPREFIX_ and
_LIBSUFFIX_.  It is really quite a bother and it gets even worse
once you introduce additional compilers \(like mingw\) into the mix.
The casual coder would poke around for a bit then give up.

The solution to this problem is to merge the two build systems and
provide some properly abstracted macros that work on multiple
platforms.  These macros will need to be available to Tcl/Tk as well
as extension authors.  Here is a short example of a couple of macros
that were developed while porting Tcl/Tk and Itcl to the Cygnus
environment.  These macros can be found in the current CVS HEAD of
gdb/Insight.

	TCL_TOOL_STATIC_LIB_LONGNAME(VAR, LIBNAME, SUFFIX)
	TCL_TOOL_SHARED_LIB_LONGNAME(VAR, LIBNAME, SUFFIX)

Using these macros, one could code the Unix and Windows versions to
use the same logic.

	if test "${SHARED_BUILD}" = "1" ; then
	  TCL_TOOL_SHARED_LIB_LONGNAME(TCL_LIB_FILE, tcl, ${TCL_SHARED_LIB_SUFFIX})
	else
	  TCL_TOOL_STATIC_LIB_LONGNAME(TCL_LIB_FILE, tcl, ${TCL_UNSHARED_LIB_SUFFIX})
	fi

Behind the scenes, the unix version might set
_TCL\_LIB\_FILE=libtcl83.so_ while the Windows version might set
_TCL\_LIB\_FILE=tcl83.dll_.  Once both build systems use the same
code, we can abstract them out into a new _tcl.m4_ file that is
shared between the Unix and Windows versions.  An extension that has
only one build system can also make use of these macros.  The concept
is not a difficult one, the problem is that the implementation takes a
very long time to get right.

# VC\+\+ vs. GCC Library Names

The previous section touched on issues related to library naming and
how they differ between Unix and Windows.  This section will focus
only on Windows and discuss some of the differences that make it
difficult to support both the VC\+\+ and gcc compilers.  Two variables
that are quite difficult to support properly are _TCL\_LIB\_SPEC_ and
_TCL\_BUILD\_LIB\_SPEC_.  The gcc compiler supports command line
arguments like _-L$\{dir\} -l$\{lib\}_ but VC\+\+ does not.  VC\+\+ users
must pass the fully qualified name of a .lib file or set an
environment variable.  To deal with this situation, the following
macros were developed.

	TCL_TOOL_LIB_SHORTNAME(VAR, LIBNAME, VERSION)
	TCL_TOOL_LIB_SPEC(VAR, DIR, LIBARG)

A single _configure.in_ file for Tcl or an extension could make use
of these macros as follows:

	TCL_TOOL_LIB_SHORTNAME(TCL_LIB_FLAG, tcl, ${TCL_VERSION})
	TCL_TOOL_LIB_SPEC(TCL_BUILD_LIB_SPEC, `pwd`, ${TCL_LIB_FLAG})
	TCL_TOOL_LIB_SPEC(TCL_LIB_SPEC, ${exec_prefix}/lib, ${TCL_LIB_FLAG})

When configured with VC\+\+, the macros would set:

	TCL_BUILD_LIB_SPEC="/build/tcl83.lib"
	TCL_LIB_SPEC="/install/tcl83.lib"

When configured with gcc, the macros would set:

	TCL_BUILD_LIB_SPEC="-L/build -ltcl83"
	TCL_LIB_SPEC="-L/install -ltcl83"

These macros are a good first step.  They provide abstraction for
library naming issues and work in both shared and static builds.  This
set of macros has been tested with Tcl, Tk, and Itcl and should be
ready for incorporation into other extensions.  One only needs to look
at Tcl bug 219330 to find an example of a core extension that only
builds with VC\+\+ under Windows.  An extension writer should not need
to solve compiler problems such as this.  The Tcl core needs to
provide abstracted macros that can be used in extensions.

# Cygwin vs. Mingw

The Windows version of Tcl traditionally supported building with VC\+\+
only.  During the Tcl 8.3 development process, gcc support was added.
Trouble is, the default version of gcc delivered with Cygwin had and
continues to have some problems compiling the Windows Tcl code.

Cygwin is a Unix/POSIX compatibility layer built on top of the Win32
API.  The Cygwin version of gcc is designed to help people compile C
programs that make use of POSIX APIs.  The Cygwin version of gcc was
not designed to support compiling Win32 native applications.  Some
support for Win32 applications was added later via the _-mno-cygwin_
command line switch, but it is far from perfect.

The Mingw project was created to produce a version of gcc that
supports building native Win32 applications.  This version of gcc is a
native Windows application, it does not depend on the Cygwin dll and
it does not link generated applications to the Cygwin dll.  In fact,
it is simply not possible to create an executable that accidently
requires the Cygwin dll when compiling with the Mingw version of gcc.
This can be a problem with the Cygwin version of gcc, especially when
C\+\+ is involved.

Tcl currently builds with the Mingw version of gcc.  Tcl does not
build with the Cygwin version of gcc even though the _-mno-cygwin_
is used.  Tcl also does not build using the Cygwin version of gcc in
POSIX mode without the _-mno-cygwin_ flag.  In addition, the
individual working on Cygwin compatibility for Tcl will not be
pursuing it in the future.  For all of these reasons, support for
Cygwin gcc should be dropped in favor of Mingw gcc.  Documentation
should be updated to instruct people to install the Mingw version of
gcc instead of the Cygwin version.  It is even possible to have both
Cygwin gcc and Mingw gcc installed on the same system, the user just
needs to make sure the correct one is on the PATH before compiling
Tcl.  A check should also be placed in the configure.in script to keep
people from accidently compiling with the Cygwin version of gcc since
it does not work and will only lead to useless bug reports.

# A New tclconfig Module

A number of Tcl extensions copy Tcl's _tcl.m4_ file into the
extension's CVS module.  For example, Itcl distributes a locally
modified version of _tcl.m4_ that supports building on Windows and
Unix with a single _configure.in_ script.  It is very difficult to
keep up maintenance when this sort of approach is used.  For one
thing, the maintainer has to constantly copy the _tcl.m4_ into
extensions.  Each and every commit to a _tcl.m4_ file in the _tcl_
CVS module needs to be followed by a commit to the same file in the
_tk_ module.  If an extension has made local modifications to the
_tcl.m4_ file, a new one can't just me copied over.  The extension
maintainer would need to merge the changes in my hand or make use of
some fancy CVS maintainer branch features that are not commonly used.
The result of all this trouble is a predictable lag in keeping an
extension's build system up to date.

Perhaps the best solution to this problem is to create a new module in
the Tcl CVS named _tclconfig_.  This module would contain all the
macro files and supporting scripts that were available to Tcl and any
extensions.  Anyone who has worked on tclpro will notice that this is
equivalent to the _config_ module that currently exists in the
_tclpro_ CVS.  The idea is the same, but the new module needs to
live in the _tcl_ CVS repo not the _tclpro_ CVS repo.  When a user
checks the _tcl_ module out of the CVS a _tclconfig_ directory
will also be created.  The _tcl/unix/aclocal.m4_ script would then
be changed from:

	builtin(include,tcl.m4)

To:

	builtin(include,../../tclconfig/tcl.m4)

This approach will provide a single destination for all configure
related changes.  It will end the need to copy _tcl.m4_ files into
each extension and will help extension authors resist the urge to make
local modifications to the _tcl.m4_ script.  If an extension author
wants to change _tcl.m4_ they will need to submit a patch via the
normal channels.  Nothing will force extension authors to use this new
approach, but it will be available to them when they are ready to
upgrade.  This change should not be integrated until Tcl 8.5.

# Extension Defaults

A Tcl extension should default to the same configuration options that
Tcl was compiled with.  For example, if _--prefix=/usr/local/tcl84_
is passed to Tcl's configure script, it should not also need to be
passed to Tk's configure script [Tcl bug 428627].  Tk should use the
compiler that Tcl was configured with by default.  In fact, each of
the following options could fit into this category:

 * --prefix

 * --exec-prefix

 * --host

 * --enable-threads

 * --enable-64bit

 * --enable-symbols

 * --enable-shared

Each one of these options will need to be saved in _tclConfig.sh_.

# Build vs. Install Configuration

The _tclConfig.sh_ script should provide information that allows an
extension to be built with either an installed or uninstalled version
of Tcl.  The current _tclConfig.sh_ largely fails to provide this
functionality to extensions.  Both build variables and install
variables are included in the _tclConfig.sh_ file, but there is
nothing to indicate to the script that loads _tclConfig.sh_ whether
or not a given _tclConfig.sh_ has actually been installed.

An extension author has a couple of choices about how to deal with
this situation.  One could simply recreate needed flags like
_TCL\_LIB\_SPEC_ and _TCL\_STUB\_LIB\_SPEC_ and ignore the definitions
in the _tclConfig.sh_ file.  Tk uses this approach.

One could also just pick from the build or install variables.  If the
extension author chose to use _TCL\_LIB\_SPEC_ instead of
_TCL\_BUILD\_LIB\_SPEC_ then the extension would only build with a
version of Tcl that was already installed.  Itcl uses this approach.

Both of these approaches are seriously flawed.  Tcl needs to provide a
means to load a _tclConfig.sh_ file without having to worry about
build vs. install flags.  The _SC\_LOAD\_TCLCONFIG_ macro can be
modified in such a way as to define
_TCL\_LIB\_SPEC=$TCL\_BUILD\_LIB\_SPEC_ when loading _tclConfig.sh_
from the build directory.  When _tclConfig.sh_ is loaded from the
install directory one could safely set
_TCL\_BUILD\_LIB\_SPEC=$TCL\_LIB\_SPEC_.

The above change would address the most obvious problem in
_tclConfig.sh_, but others remain.  Tcl bugs 219260 and 421835
provide some examples of variables in _tclConfig.sh_ that may work
at build time but not install time and vice versa.  One possible long
term solution could be to create a _tclBuildConfig.sh_ as well as a
_tclConfig.sh_ script.  The _tclBuildConfig.sh_ could be loaded by
the _SC\_LOAD\_TCLCONFIG_ macro when _--with-tcl_ indicated a build
directory.  The _tclConfig.sh_ script would not contain any build
variables and would be the only configuration file to get installed.

# Chicken or the Egg

A number of targets in the current Tcl build process depend on having
a working version of Tcl on the users _PATH_.  It is not entirely
clear if this was intentional.  Either way, it creates real problems
for users.  Tcl bugs 420501 and 464874 demonstrates how a user might
get a build error indicating that tclsh cannot be found before tclsh
is even built.  This problem should be straightforward to fix.  Tcl
patch 465874 describes on possible approach.  The fact that this
problem exists in the first place is indicative of a larger issue.

The Tcl build process should minimize external dependencies.  This
seems like a simple thing to seek agreement on, but people are
constantly advocating changes that fly in the face of this goal.  Tcl
bug 219259 describes one such misguided effort.  Older releases of
Itcl mistakenly assumed a version of tclsh would exist on the system
and tried to install files using a Tcl script named
_installFile.tcl_.  [[59]](59.md) seeks to embed Tcl build information into
tclsh so that Tcl extensions could build themselves using Tcl scripts.
Each of these approaches make different assumptions about how Tcl will
bootstrap itself.

The current bootstrap approach depends on tclsh in some circumstances
and not in others.  This tends to work most of the time.  Trouble is,
if the user does something to change the time-stamps of certain files,
it can leave the tree in an unbuildable state.  Another approach would
be to remove all uses of tclsh in the Makefile.  This removes the
possibility of accidently depending on tclsh during the build process
but it can make the maintainer's life much more difficult.  The most
drastic solution would be to bootstrap a version of tclsh that could
be used to rebuild Tcl as well as extensions.  This is doable, but it
will get very tricky in the case of a cross compile since the
bootstrap version of tclsh would need to run on the build system while
the generated version of tclsh would need to run on the host system.
If the normal build process is always going to depend on tclsh, a
private build version of tclsh will need to be bootstrapped.
Realistically, this may be too much work to implement.  It seems the
only workable approach is to make sure none of the targets in the
normal build process depend on an external tclsh.

# Death to TCL\_DBGX

The most thoroughly evil part of the entire Tcl build process is the
_TCL\_DBGX_ variable used in _configure.in_, _Makefile.in_, and
_tclConfig.sh_.  The following quote from Brent Welch say it all:

 > _"The TCL\_DBGX manifestation is one of the worst /bin/sh quoting
   hell situations I have encountered."_

Presumably, the _TCL\_DBGX_ variable was introduced to support
building of debug vs. non-debug versions of Tcl and installing them
into the same directory.  That may have been a noble goal, but in
practice this indirection makes many parts of the build system
extremely difficult to modify.  This scheme also fails to deal with
other identifying suffixes like 's' for a static build or 't' for a
threaded build.  A number of queries as to the usefulness of
_TCL\_DBGX_ have appeared on news:comp.lang.tcl but none produced
satisfactory results.  The _TCL\_DBGX_ variable should be removed and
never spoken of again.

# Configure Flags

The _--enable-symbols_ should be renamed to _--enable-debug_.
Quite a few other software projects use the _--enable-debug_ flag.
A Google search turned up no other projects that make use of the
_--enable-symbols_ flag.  This change would have documentation
impact, but it would be minimal.  The old flag could be retained for
compatibility if a significant number of folks were concerned.

The Tcl 8.4 release removes the _--enable-gcc_ flag.  This flag
introduced a number of problems that are much better solved by simply
setting the _CC_ environment variable before running configure.
This change has already been incorporated into the CVS and is only
mentioned here for the sake of completeness.

# Risks

Implementing this TIP is by no means an easy task.  Build system
changes are by far the most dangerous since a broken configuration
will not be noticed until someone actually tries to build on the given
system.  One can only ask for forgiveness before hand.  Large scale
build system changes will no doubt break something.  For this reason,
many of the suggested changes should be incorporated into the Tcl 8.5
release.

# Alternatives

One alternative is to continue to use the existing system.  While
things would get no worse, they would also get no better.  Another
alternative is to replace the existing TEA based build system with a
build system written in Tcl.  This TIP does explore some of the build
issues a Tcl based system will face, but tries to focus on improving
the existing system instead of replacing TEA.

# See Also

SourceForge bugs: 219259, 219260, 219330, 420501, 421835, 428627,
464874

SourceForge patch: 465874

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

