# TIP 350: Tcl Database Connectivity - Corrigenda
	Author:		Kevin B. Kenny <kennykb@acm.org>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Informative
	Created:	18-Apr-2009
	Post-History:
	Vote:		Pending
	Obsoletes:	308
-----

# Abstract

This TIP defines a common database access interface for Tcl scripts. It is an
update to [[308]](308.md) to take into account experience gained since that TIP was
written. Note that this TIP does _not_ repeat the contents of that one,
which is mostly correct apart from the changes described in this document.

# Summary of Changes

Implementation experience on Tcl Database Connectivity [[308]](308.md) has exposed
several issues with its specification that require editorial corrections. In
brief:

   1. The error codes returned from TDBC drivers are detailed in such a way as
      to make them more usable in the **try** command.

   1. The **starttransaction** method on a database connection is renamed,
      **begintransaction**

   1. The **execute** method on a statement, and all of the methods that
      invoke it \(**allrows** and **foreach** on database connections\)
      changes its behaviour in the case where a bound variable in its SQL code
      refers to a Tcl variable that is an array, or a read trace on the
      associated variable fails.

   1. The order of arguments on the **foreach** methods on database
      connections, statements and result sets is changed.

   1. The _statementClass_ and _resultSetClass_ instance variables, and
      the _init_ method of connections, statements and result sets, are
      deprecated; a new initialization API is provided.

   1. A Tcl command, **tdbc::mapSqlState**, and a C function,
      **Tdbc\_MapSqlState** are provided for the convenience of driver
      writers.

# Introduction

The actual implementation of TDBC and three database drivers for it has
revealed a handful of mistakes in the TDBC specification [[308]](308.md).  The purpose
of this TIP is to correct those errors and promulgate a specification that
matches TDBC as implemented.

# Specification

## Error Codes

Whenever a TDBC driver reports an error in interacting with an underlying
database, it SHOULD set the interpreter error code to a list of at least four
elements. The first element should be the constant string **TDBC**. The
second should be an 'error class' chosen from the list below.  The third
should be the \(usually five-character\) SQL state that the database reported,
or the constant string **HY000** if the SQL state cannot be determined.  \(In
the latter case, the error class should be **GENERAL\_ERROR**.\)  The fourth
element should be the name of the TDBC driver that reported the error. Any
elements beyond the fourth SHOULD give further details \(for example an error
code returned by a native API\), and are driver dependent.

The permissible values for the error class are as follows.  Note that each one
corresponds to the first two characters of a five-character 'SQL state' that
is common to most SQL database API's; the SQL state corresponding to the class
is also given.

	 SQL State
	 Prefix     Error Class
	 --------------------------------------------------------
	    00      UNQUALIFIED_SUCCESSFUL_COMPLETION
	    01      WARNING
	    02      NO_DATA
	    07      DYNAMIC_SQL_ERROR
	    08      CONNECTION_EXCEPTION
	    09      TRIGGERED_ACTION_EXCEPTION
	    0A      FEATURE_NOT_SUPPORTED
	    0B      INVALID_TRANSACTION_INITIATION
	    0D      INVALID_TARGET_TYPE_SPECIFICATION
	    0F      LOCATOR_EXCEPTION
	    0K      INVALID_RESIGNAL_STATEMENT
	    0L      INVALID_GRANTOR
	    0P      INVALID_ROLE_SPECIFICATION
	    0W      INVALID_STATEMENT_UN_TRIGGER
	    20      CASE_NOT_FOUND_FOR_CASE_STATEMENT
	    21      CARDINALITY_VIOLATION
	    22      DATA_EXCEPTION
	    23      CONSTRAINT_VIOLATION
	    24      INVALID_CURSOR_STATE
	    25      INVALID_TRANSACTION_STATE
	    26      INVALID_SQL_STATEMENT_IDENTIFIER
	    27      TRIGGERED_DATA_CHANGE_VIOLATION
	    28      INVALID_AUTHORIZATION_SPECIFICATION
	    2B      DEPENDENT_PRIVILEGE_DESCRIPTORS_STILL_EXIST
	    2C      INVALID_CHARACTER_SET_NAME
	    2D      INVALID_TRANSACTION_TERMINATION
	    2E      INVALID_CONNECTION_NAME
	    2F      SQL_ROUTINE_EXCEPTION
	    33      INVALID_SQL_DESCRIPTOR_NAME
	    34      INVALID_CURSOR_NAME
	    35      INVALID_CONDITION_NUMBER
	    36      CURSOR_SENSITIVITY_EXCEPTION
	    37      SYNTAX_ERROR_OR_ACCESS_VIOLATION
	    38      EXTERNAL_ROUTINE_EXCEPTION
	    39      EXTERNAL_ROUTINE_INVOCATION_EXCEPTION
	    3B      SAVEPOINT_EXCEPTION
	    3C      AMBIGUOUS_CURSOR_NAME
	    3D      INVALID_CATALOG_NAME
	    3F      INVALID_SCHEMA_NAME
	    40      TRANSACTION_ROLLBACK
	    42      SYNTAX_ERROR_OR_ACCESS_RULE_VIOLATION
	    44      WITH_CHECK_OPTION_VIOLATION
	    45      UNHANDLED_USER_DEFINED_EXCEPTION
	    46      JAVA_DDL
	    51      INVALID_APPLICATION_STATE
	    53      INSUFFICIENT_RESOURCES
	    54      PROGRAM_LIMIT_EXCEEDED
	    55      OBJECT_NOT_IN_PREREQUISITE_STATE
	    56      MISCELLANEOUS_SQL_OR_PRODUCT_ERROR
	    57      RESOURCE_NOT_AVAILABLE_OR_OPERATOR_INTERVENTION
	    58      SYSTEM_ERROR
	    70      INTERRUPTED
	    F0      CONFIGURATION_FILE_ERROR
	    HY      GENERAL_ERROR
	    HZ      REMOTE_DATABASE_ACCESS_ERROR
	    IM      DRIVER_ERROR
	    P0      PGSQL_PLSQL_ERROR
	    S0      ODBC_2_0_DML_ERROR
	    S1      ODBC_2_0_GENERAL_ERROR
	    XA      TRANSACTION_ERROR
	    XX      INTERNAL_ERROR
	  anything
	   else     UNKNOWN_SQLSTATE

The reason for structuring the error codes in this way is to make errors more
accessible to the **try** command [[329]](329.md). For instance, a Tcl script that
wishes to detect and handle division by zero in a SQL statement might look
like:

	  try {
	      $statement foreach row {
	          # ... process the row
	      }
	 } trap {TDBC DATA_EXCEPTION 22012} {
	      puts "Division by zero!"
	 }

Since the previous specification [[308]](308.md) left the error code unspecified, this
change is not expected to impact any client code.

## Transaction Control

The **begintransaction** method was inadvertently called,
**starttransaction** in the TDBC specification. Therefore, the word
**starttransaction** should be replaced with **begintransaction** wherever
it appears.

This change will break no existing code; no **starttransaction** method has
been defined for any TDBC driver.

## The **execute** Method of a Statement - Variable Substitution

The rule that an array variable provided as a bound value to a substituent in
a SQL statement MUST result in an error has proven to be awkward to implement
in practice.  Moreover, the original specification [[308]](308.md) fails to indicate
what happens if a read trace on one of a statement's bound variables throws an
error.

The sentence,

 > An array variable provided to a substituent MUST result in an error.

is therefore to be replaced with:

 > An array variable provided to a substituent, or a variable in which
   substitution results in an error being reported by a read trace, MUST
   result in a NULL value being provided.

This change is expected to have minimal impact on existing code; the behaviour
being described is simply providing a NULL value for a case that was an error
before \(an array where a scalar is expected\) and a case that was unspecified
before \(an error within a variable trace\).

## The _foreach_ Methods

The syntax of the _foreach_ method of connections, statements, and result
sets in the original specification contains editorial errors.  The correct
syntax is:

 > _dbHandle_ **foreach** ?**-as** **lists**\|**dicts**?
   ?**-columnsvariable** _varName_? ?--? 
   _varName_ _sql_ ?_dictionary_? _script_

 > _statement_ **foreach** ?**-as** **lists**\|**dicts**?
   ?**-columnsvariable** _varName_? ?--? 
   _varName_ ?_dictionary_? _script_

 > _resultset_ **foreach**  ?**-as** **lists**\|**dicts**?
   ?**-columnsvariable** _varName_? ?--? 
   _varName_ _script_

This change represents an editorial correction; the reference implementation
functioned in this way even prior to the acceptance of the original
specification [[308]](308.md).

## The Constructor Patterns

The _statementClass_ variable, and the **init** method, are no longer
recommended for use in the constructors of connection classes.  Instead, the
recommended pattern is that a connection class SHOULD implement a
**statementCreate** method that accepts the fully qualified name of the
command that is to represent the statement, the connection handle and the SQL
statement, and returns a handle to the statement object.  The usual way to do
so is with a forwarded method:

	  forward statementCreate ::driver::statement create

If the **statementCreate** method is not present, the default one looks for
a variable named _statementClass_ in the connection object, and invokes its
**create** command.

In this way, drivers that are written to the original specification continue
to operate.

Similarly, the _resultSetClass_ variable, and the **init** method, are no
longer recommended for use in the constructors of statement classes. Instead,
the statement class SHOULD implement a **resultSetCreate** method that
accepts the fully qualified name of the command that will represent the result
set, the statement handle, and the parameters to the **prepare** method.
Once again, this method will usually simply be forwarded to the appropriate
constructor:

	  forward resultSetCreate ::driver::resultSet create

Once again, backward compatibility is provided by a **resultSetCreate**
method in the base class.  This method looks for a _resultSetClass_ variable
in the statement instance, and interprets it as a class name, invoking the
_create_ method in that class.

_Rationale:_ These changes eliminate several jumps among methods with
**uplevel** calls, and yield both simpler code and improved performance.

## SQL State Mapping

For the convenience of drivers that deal with database APIs that provide a
standard SQL dtate in the event of errors, a Tcl command,
**tdbc::mapSqlState** is provided.  This command accepts a \(usually five
character\) SQL state, and returns the error class that should go in the second
element of the error code.  The mapping is described in the table in the
**Error Codes** section above.

Similarly, A C function is provided:

 > const char \* **Tdbc\_MapSqlState**\(const char \*_sqlstate_\);

This call looks up the given _sqlstate_ and returns its error class
according to the table.

# License

This file is explicitly released to the public domain and the author
explicitly disclaims all rights under copyright law.

