# TIP 357: Export TclLoadFile
	Author:         Kevin Kenny <kevin.b.kenny@gmail.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        01-Oct-2009
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
	Tcl-Ticket:     2891616
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to promote the internal calls, _TclLoadFile_ and
_TclpFindSymbol_ to the
external API, making them available to C extensions. In addition, it
proposes to introduce a _Tcl\_FSUnloadFile_ to the VFS layer, removing
the weird duplicate client data from _TclLoadFile_ and wrapping all
necessary data into the **Tcl\_LoadHandle**

# Rationale

In developing TDBC [[308]](308.md), the author of this TIP was advised to look at the
way that the 'oratcl' extension contrives to build on a system where
Oracle is not installed as a model for TDBC extensions.  Examination
of the code revealed that it operates essentially by constructing at
run time a Stubs table for the routines in the Oracle client
library. There is a maze of **\#if** directives selecting whether
this process is accomplished by the system calls that manage Unix .so
files \(_dlopen_ and friends\), Windows .DLL files \(_LoadLibrary_ and
related calls\), HP-UX .shl files \(_shl\_load,_ etc.\), and so on.

Tcl already has functionality so that a caller can abstract away all
this complexity.  It provides the capability in the _TclLoadFile_
call, but this call is **MODULE\_SCOPE** and not exported even in the
internal Stubs table. For this reason, it is entirely unavailable to
TEA-compliant extensions.

If this call were available, it would be feasible, in the 8.6 time frame,
to bundle all the database-specific TDBC drivers with the core TDBC
distribution, since things could be set up so that they will build
anywhere, even in the absence of the databases where they connect.

However, this call was never fully rationalized in the VFS world. Its
strange API \(with both a **Tcl\_LoadHandle** and a **ClientData**,
and a function pointer for unloading the library\) is, as several reviewers
pointed out, not somehting that we want to make available to general callers.
Hence, a few more routines need rework.

# Specification

The _TclLoadFile_ call shall be renamed _Tcl\_LoadFile_ and exported
in the external Stubs.  Its call signature shall be changed to:

 > EXTERN int
   **Tcl\_LoadFile**\(
       Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_,
       Tcl\_Obj \*_pathPtr_,
       const char \*_symbols_[],
       int _flags_,
       void \*_procPtrs_,
       Tcl\_LoadHandle \*_handlePtr_\);

In this call, _interp_ designates an interpreter for error reporting.
_pathPtr_ is an object containing the path of the library to be loaded.
If _pathPtr_ is a single name, the library search path of the current
environment will be used to resolve it.  
The _symbols_ array  contains a NULL-terminated set of
character strings that are the names
of the imported symbols. _symbols_ may be NULL if the library is to be loaded without resolving any symbols.

The return value of _Tcl\_LoadFile_ is a standard Tcl result code. If the
result is TCL\_ERROR, the interpreter result will contain an appropriate
error message.

On return, _Tcl\_LoadFile_ fills in the block of memory commencing
at the address given by _procPtrs_ with the addresses
that correspond to the names in _symbols._ If a name cannot be
resolved in the given library, an error will be returned and all
entries in _procPtrs_ will be invalid. _procPtrs_ may be NULL
if no symbols are to be resolved.

On a successful return,
the _loadHandle_ pointer will be a handle suitable for
passing to _Tcl\_FindSymbol_ for resolving additional symbols in the
library, or to _Tcl\_FSUnloadFile_ to unload the library.

The _TclpFindSymbol_ call shall be renamed _Tcl\_FindSymbol_ and
exported in the external Stubs.  Its call signature shall be:

 > EXTERN void\*
   **Tcl\_FindSymbol**\(
       Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_,
       Tcl\_LoadHandle \*_loadHandle_,
       const char \*_symbol_\);

This call searches for the given _symbol_ in the already-loaded
library identified by _loadHandle_. If the symbol is found, a pointer
to its memory address is returned.  Otherwise, NULL is returned, and
an error message is left in _interp_ \(if _interp_ is not NULL\).

A new call, _Tcl\_FSUnloadFile_ shall be introduced and exported in
the external Stubs.Its call signature shall be:

 > EXTERN int
   **Tcl\_FSUnloadFile**\(
       Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_,
       Tcl\_LoadHandle \*_loadHandle_\);

This call unloads the library identified by _loadHandle_.  It differs
from the [unload] command in that no 'unload' procedure is called; the
library is simply unloaded without first being given a chance to clean
itself up. \(This function is a lower-level interface used by [unload]
as part of doing its work.\) The return value is either TCL\_OK or TCL\_ERROR;
when TCL\_ERROR is returned, an appropriate message is left in the
result of _interp_ \(if _interp_ is not NULL\).

# Internals

The **Tcl\_LoadHandle** object shall be represented internally by a
structure, declared in \<tclInt.h\>, looking like:

	 struct Tcl_LoadHandle_ {
	     ClientData clientData;	/* Client data is the load handle in the
	 				 * native filesystem if a module was loaded
	 				 * there, or an opaque pointer to a structure
	 				 * for further bookkeeping on load-from-VFS
	 				 * and load-from-memory */
	     TclFindSymbolProc* findSymbolProcPtr;
	 				/* Procedure that resolves symbols in a
	 				 * loaded module */
	     Tcl_FSUnloadFileProc* unloadFileProcPtr;
	 				/* Procedure that unloads a loaded module */
	 }

The _Tcl\_FindSymbolProc_ and _Tcl\_FSUnloadFileProc_ data types are
declared to be functions of the same type signature as _Tcl\_FindSymbol_
and _Tcl\_FSUnloadFile_.

Virtual file systems that implement the _loadFileProc_ are responsible
for ensuring that their **Tcl\_LoadHandle_ that the _loadFileProc_
returns conforms with this convention.  As far as the author has been
able to determine, no non-Core filesystem provides anything but NULL
for the _loadFileProc_. Certainly, tclvfs and trofs do not. Most other
virtual filesystems layer atop tclvfs.  

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is nearing completion, and the draft code is
available attached to [Patch 2891616](https://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?aid=2891616)  at SourceForge.

# License

This file is explicitly released to the public domain and the author
explicitly disclaims all rights under copyright law.

