# TIP 36: Library Access to 'Subst' Functionality
	Author:		Donal K. Fellows <fellowsd@cs.man.ac.uk>
	State:		Final
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.4
	Vote:		Done
	Created:	13-Jun-2001
	Post-History:	
-----

# Abstract

Some applications make very heavy use of the _subst_ command - it
seems particularly popular in the active-content-generation field -
and for them it is important to optimise this as much as possible.
This TIP adds a direct interface to these capabilities to the Tcl
library, allowing programmers to avoid the modest overheads of even
_Tcl\_EvalObjv_ and the option parser for the _subst_ command
implementation.

# Functionality Changes

There will be one script-visible functionality change from the current
implementation; if the evaluation of any command substitution returns
TCL\_BREAK, then the result of the _subst_ command will be the string
up to that point and no further.  This contrasts with the current
behaviour where TCL\_BREAK \(like TCL\_CONTINUE\) just causes the current
command substitution to finish early.

# Design Decisions

The code should be created by effectively splitting
_Tcl\_SubstObjCmd_ in the current _.../generic/tclCmdMZ.c_ into two
pieces.  One of these pieces will have the same interface as the
present code and will contain the argument parser.  The other piece
will be the implementation of the _subst_ behaviour and will be
separately exposed at the C level as well as being called by the
front-end code.

The code should take positive flags stating what kinds of
substitutions should be performed, as this is closest to the current
internal implementation of the _subst_ command.  These flags will be
named with the prefix TCL\_SUBST\_\*.  For programming convenience, the
flag TCL\_SUBST\_ALL will also be provided allowing the common case of
wanting all substitutions to be performed with a minimum of fuss.

The string to be substituted will be passed in as a _Tcl\_Obj \*_ too,
as this is both easiest to do from the point-of-view of the front-end
code and permits additional optimisation of the core at some future
point if it proves necessary and/or desirable.  By contrast, passing
in a standard C string or a _Tcl\_DString \*_ does not permit any such
optimisations in the future.

The code should return a newly-allocated _Tcl\_Obj \*_ as this allows
for the efficient implementation of the front-end involving no
re-copying of the resulting string.  It also allows error conditions
to be represented by NULL \(with an error message in the interpreter
result\) and does not force a Tcl\_DString reference to be passed in as
an _out_ parameter; returning the result gives a much clearer call
semantics.  Another advantage of using _Tcl\_Obj_s to build the
result is the fact that they have a more sophisticated memory
allocation algorithm that copes more efficiently with very large
strings; when large and small strings are being combined together \(as
is easily the case in _subst_\) this can make a substantial
difference.

# Public Interface

_Added to .../generic/tcl.h_

	#define TCL_SUBST_COMMANDS    0x01
	#define TCL_SUBST_VARIABLES   0x02
	#define TCL_SUBST_BACKSLASHES 0x04
	#define TCL_SUBST_ALL         0x07

_Added to .../generic/tcl.decls_

	declare someNumber generic {
	    Tcl_Obj * Tcl_SubstObj( Tcl_Interp *interp,
	                            Tcl_Obj *objPtr,
	                            int flags)
	}

# Implementation

The implementation is to be developed upon acceptance of this TIP, but
will involve _Tcl\_AppendToObj_ and _Tcl\_AppendObjToObj_.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

