# TIP 361: Releasing Channel Buffers
	Author:		Wayne Cuddy <wcuddy@useunix.net>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Pending
	Created:	03-Feb-2010
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Post-History:
-----

# Abstract

Tcl should provide a mechanism by which a channel's output buffer can be
released without requiring that Tcl flush any remaining data in the buffer to
the operating system. This is of particular interest with output mechanisms
which can block indefinitely causing the interpreter to consume unnecessary
resources or prevent the interpreter from exiting.

# Problem

When working with processes that handle multiplexing/non-blocking I/O it is
not uncommon to write, or call **puts**, with more data than the operating
system will accept. Thus Tcl begins to buffer this data using internal buffers
at the application level and flushes the data in the background. Problems
arise when the consumer of this data, be it the other end of a socket, pipe or
FIFO, refuse to read data and do not close the channel.

This has adverse effects on the **close** function and consequently the
interpreter/process when it attempts to flush and close channels during
finalization.

## Consequences

   1. When **close** is issued on a non-blocking channel Tcl removes the
      channel from pool of accessible channels from the current interpreter
      and attempts to flush any remaining data in the output buffers before
      closing the channel. Since the other end of the channel is not consuming
      data Tcl will never be able to flush it's internal buffers nor close the
      lower level channel driver. In a multiplexing server which opens new
      channels this will eventually result in resource starvation or denial of
      service.

   2. When **exit** is called Tcl attempts to flush all output buffers, if
      any open channel blocks the interpreter will be unable exit and must be
      forcibly terminated by OS specific mechanisms.

# Propose API Additions

Provide a function and/or flags to existing functions which can be used to
clear internal buffers without flushing.

   * **chan clear** _channelId_

   * **close -noflush** _channelId_

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

