# TIP 363: Vector Math in the Tcl Core
	Author:		Karl C. Hansen <Karl.Hansen@BrilliantPoints.com>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	9.0
	Vote:		Pending
	Created:	02-Mar-2010
	Post-History:	
	Keywords:	expand,{*},vector,math
-----

# Abstract

The "expand" operator - **\{\*\}** - was adopted in Tcl 8.5 and is very useful
for simplifying code involving lists.  It is proposed to add this operator to
the list of actions performed during processing of double-quote \("\), joining
the **$**, **[**, and **\\**, and to modify the behavior of **$** in
variable substitution.  The proposed behavior _will_ break existing
substitution, but a trivial quoted-string substitution restores original
behavior with the new approach. The proposed approach will enable eventual
incorporation of vector-math to the Tcl engine without changing any of the
existing syntax.

# Rationale

It is desired to enhance the current math engine in TCL to handle vector math,
without having to create new syntax or add cumbersome new function calls.
Given the assignments **set ScalarA 1**, **set ScalarB 2**, **set ListA
\{1 2 3\}**, and **set ListB \{4 5 6\}**, evaluating **$ScalarA \+ $ScalarB**,
**$ListA \+ $ListB**, and **$ListA \+ $ScalarB** would all be trivially
understandable, with the first behaving as currently implemented, the second
returning a list containing the element-by-element sums of the two lists, and
the third returning a list containing the elements of ListA incremented by the
common ScalarB.

With the proposed enhancement \(see below\) the expression parser would receive
a brace-delimited set of values wherever the lists appear, and a single value
wherever the scalars appear.

With the proposed enhancement, and a vector-math core enhancement, given the
assignments above, the following would behave identically:

	expr $ListA + {4 5 6}
	expr $ListA + $ListB
	expr {1 2 3} + $ListB
	expr {1 2 3} + {4 5 6}

With the proposed enhancement, incorporating vector math into the TCL core is
vastly simplified, reducing to enhancing the current math handlers to perform
different actions based on whether they received lists or scalars or both, and
checking that the vectors have the appropriate element counts for the
operation specified.

# Proposal

 1. Add expansion -- **\{\*\}** -- to set of actions performed during double-quote processing.

	 > 1. Treat expand operator as a single character 'tri-graph'.

	 > 2. Escape the operator -- **\\\{\*\}** -- to turn it into "regular text"
      causing it to behave as it currently does during double-quote
      processing. Note that this is identical with the current behavior of
      escape, i.e., **\\\{** currently gives **\{**.  With the new
      implementation it turns the expand operator into normal text inside of a
      quoted string.

 2. Modify **$** substitution so that _lists_ are enclosed in braces
    during substitution, i.e. after **set A \{1 2\}** execution of **puts
    "$A"** yields **\{1 2\}** instead of **1 2** as it currently does.
    Note that this behavior only manifests inside of quoted strings, as the
    assignment **set B $A** still gives the same results as the original
    implementation, i.e. assigning a list to **B**.

	 > 1. Prefix **$** with expand **\{\*\}** to restore current behavior, i.e.,
   with the same assignment above, execution of **puts "\{\*\}$A"** yields **1
   2** instead of **\{\*\}1 2** as it currently does.  Note that this provides
   a fairly simple way to fix scripts broken by implementing this proposal.
   If exising scripts contain quoted lists, simply \(a\) replace all
   double-quoted occurrances of **\{\*\}** with **\\\{\*\}**, and \(b\) replace all
   double-quoted occurrances of **$** with **\{\*\}$**.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

