# TIP 367: A Command to Remove Elements from a List
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Vote:           Done
	Post-History:	
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <dkf@users.sf.net>
	Created:        18-May-2010
	Keywords:       Tcl, delete, item
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-367
	Votes-For:      DKF, JN, DGP, FV, SL, AK
	Votes-Against:  none
	Votes-Present:  none 
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a command, **lremove**, that takes a list value and a
collection of indices, and returns a list that is the input list with the
elements at those indices removed.

# Rationale

Tcl has many operations for working with lists, such as **list** for
building them, **lappend** for adding to them, **linsert** for insertion,
**lreplace** for replacement of ranges, and **lset** for replacement of
individual elements, but it has none that is designed to remove elements of a
list. While the functionality can be simulated in the simple case with
**lreplace**, this is rather more difficult when multiple indices are
present. It is particularly challenging when using a mixture of indices that
are defined relative to the start and the end of the list. Since the tools for
doing the mapping of indices to list positions are easily available at the C
level, I propose to add a command to Tcl to do the removal operation that
takes advantage of the capabilities to do this all correctly.

# Proposed Change

This TIP proposes adding a command, **lremove**, with the following syntax:

 > **lremove** _list_ ?_index_? ?_index..._?

That is, the command takes one mandatory argument, _list_, and an arbitrary
number of _index_ arguments \(including zero\). The _list_ argument must be
a valid Tcl list, and each of the _index_ arguments must be a valid Tcl
index \(see [[176]](176.md) for a description\) where **end** will refer to the last
element of _list_. Assuming syntactic validity, the result will be a list
that is the same as _list_ except for the removal of the elements at each
given _index_. The result shall be as if all removals happen simultaneously
and the order of the _index_ arguments shall be unimportant; if an element
is indicated twice \(whether through syntactically identical indices or not\)
then it will be as if it was only indicated once.

# Examples

	% lremove {a b c d e} 1
	a c d e
	% lremove {a b c d e} end-1
	a b c e
	% lremove {a b c d e} 1 3
	a c e
	% lremove {a b c d e} 3 1
	a c e
	% lremove {a b c d e} 2 2
	a b d e
	% lremove {a b c d e} 3 end-1
	a b c e
	% lremove {a b c d e} 1 3 1 4 0
	c

# Implementation

See the `tip-367` branch.

# Note

The author of this TIP considers it highly acceptable to extend it to make
each index be able to be an index list that addresses into a nested list (in
the manner of **lset**) to find elements to delete, so long as the constraint
remains that the indices can be provided in any order and it is not an error
to have one index mask another.

He does not provide an implementation that supports this.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

