# TIP 369: Widget cargo command
	Author:         Russell Davidson <russelld@actarg.com>
	Author:         Trevor Davel <twylite@crypt.co.za>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        15-Jul-2010
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tk,user-defined data,dictionary
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tk-Ticket:      3023578
-----

# Abstract

This TIP is to add a **cargo** subcommand to widgets for storing data in a
data dictionary. This TIP is related to [[349]](349.md).

# Specification

It is proposed that a **cargo** subcommand be added to most widgets that
will allow the user to store data related to the widget in a data dictionary.
With the **cargo** command there are three parameters that can go with it:
**set**, **unset**, and **get**.

**Set** adds and alters entries in the cargo dictionary.

 > _pathName_ **cargo set** _name value_ ?_name value ..._?

**Unset**, with the name of an entry, will delete the entry from the cargo
dictionary and free the memory that entry used. **Unset**, without an entry
name, will delete the entire dictionary and free all memory.

 > _pathName_ **cargo unset** ?_name ..._?

**Get** with the name of an entry will return the associated value.
**Get** without an entry will return all entry-value pairs.

 > _pathName_ **cargo get** ?_name_?

# Usage

The following is based on a widget called _.wgt_ that has already been
created:

	.wgt cargo set help "This is a widget" use "Shows a widget"

This puts two entries into the cargo dictionary, one called _help_, with the
value "_This is a widget_", and one called _use_ with the value "_Shows a
widget_".

	.wgt cargo set help "This is a wonderful widget" use2 "Shows a great widget"

This alters the value of the entry _help_ to "_This is a wonderful
widget_", and adds the entry _use2_ with the value "_Shows a great
widget_"

	.wgt cargo unset use

This erases the entry _use_ and frees the memory.

	puts [.wgt cargo get help]

This prints "_This is a wonderful widget_", the value of the entry _help_.

	puts [.wgt cargo get use]

This prints an empty string because the entry _use_ has been deleted. When
an entry that doesn't exist is accessed with **get**, a blank string is
returned.

	puts [.wgt cargo get use2]

This prints "_Shows a great widget_", the value of the entry _use2_.

	 puts [.wgt cargo get]

This prints "_help \{This is a wonderful widget\} use2 \{Shows a great
widget\}_".

	.wgt cargo unset

This deletes all entries and frees the memory

Note that when a widget is destroyed, the cargo dictionary associated with it
is erased and the memory is freed.

# Rationale

It is possible to duplicate this functionality by creating additional
procedures and variables. But doing this in Tcl has the downside of creating
more overhead when running the script. It also makes more things for the coder
to keep track of. By putting the dictionary in the base code, there is less
overhead and less for the developer to keep track of. If no cargo dictionary
at all is wanted there is no additional overhead beyond an unused pointer in
each widget.

Memory management is a big benefit. As widgets are created/destroyed, it is
easy to inadvertently generate memory leaks where structures are created for
new widgets, filled with data, and then inadvertently left around after the
widget is destroyed. When the data is stored with the widget instance, garbage
gets cleaned up much more reliably.

The **cargo** subcommand can also be used to help implement tool-tip
funcionality.  We could suggest that tool tips be supported natively in Tk,
but that request would be easily argued against with the logic that it can be
easily re-created in Tcl. So **cargo** is suggested instead as a very
general way of facilitating a whole host of functionality to be implemented in
widget wrappers without having to keep and maintain scads of external data in
auxiliary hashes.

One of the biggest challenges we face with Tcl/Tk is keeping it somewhat
object oriented \(without having to inherit the whole overhead structure of one
of the multitude of available OOPs\). When a new instance of a widget or a
megawidget gets created, it is important to be able to keep track of which
variables are related to instances and which ones apply to a whole class. We
currently solve this by including the instance name in the hash index. While
this works, it does get messy sometimes. And it would be appealing to be able
to make individual instances of widgets responsible for storing their own
data. It would certainly allow for a greater degree of isolation between
instances.

In short, **cargo** does not actually implement any specific functionality
in the widget which a megawidget might otherwise handle. But it does
facilitate easier implementation of a broad range of compound and megawidget
functionality.

# Implementation

A patch exists in SourceForge \(FRQ 3023578
<https://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?aid=3023578> \)

----

# Comments

Twylite 2010/08/10:

   * The performance overhead for doing this in a script rather than in the core
     is minimal.

   * Developer overhead is easily dealt with by means of an appropriate 
     abstraction.

   * Script-level resource management can be achieved by binding to <Destroy>.

   * This proposal fails to address some variables that may need to be 
     associated with a widget, in particular those used with -variable or 
     -textvariable which require the ability to reference the variable by name.  
     These are also instance-related variables that can benefit from automated 
     resource management and a cleaner abstraction.

   * For a pure-Tcl implementation of functionality equivalent to **cargo**
     plus direct reference by name, take a look at my tk::wprop module
    \(doc <http://dev.crypt.co.za/incubator/doc/tcltm/tk/wprop.wiki> , source 
    <http://dev.crypt.co.za/incubator/artifact/d480935465> \)   

----

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

