# TIP 375: Symmetric Coroutines and Yieldto
	Author:         Miguel Sofer <msofer@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        12-Aug-2010
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       coroutine,yield
	Obsoletes:      373
	Obsoleted-By:	396
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
-----

# Abstract

The new command **yieldto** allows a coroutine to suspend its execution and
tailcall into an arbitrary command. If the new command is another coroutine's
resume command we obtain symmetric coroutines.

## Rationale

The current **yield** and proposed **yieldm** commands suspend a coroutine
and return the control to the coroutine's caller: they implement asymmetric
coroutines.

It is well known that symmetric and asymmetric coroutines have equal power, in
that each can be implemented on top of the other. In Tcl8.6 as of today,
symmetric coroutines can be implemented by coding a scheduler, which may but
doesn't have to use the event loop. The new command **yieldto** implements
symmetric coroutines directly.

The ability of **yieldto** to yield to an arbitrary command also provides
new possibilities. For instance, it allows to return a non-ok code to the
caller without terminating the coroutine:

	 yieldto return -level 0 -code 1 ERROR

# Proposal for "yieldto"

The new command

 > **yieldto** _cmd_ ?_arg1 ..._?

causes:

 1. the currently executing coroutine to suspend its execution \(yield\),

 2. the command built from the arguments to **yieldto**, as resolved in the
    coroutine's context, to be run in the coroutine's caller scope,

 3. from the point of view of the coroutine's caller, the return value and
    options of the new command is what the coroutine returned on yielding.

In other words, **yieldto** implements "suspend yourself and **tailcall**
the new command"; **yieldto** is to **yield** as **tailcall** is to
**return**.

## Implementation of "yieldto"

Simply rename the **::tcl::unsupported::yieldTo** into the global namespace
while getting rid of the camelCase, and extend the **coroutine**
documentation and test-suite to refer to the new command.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

