# TIP 377: Portably Determining the Number of Processors in the System
	Author:         Andreas Kupries <andreask@activestate.com>
	State:          Withdrawn
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        13-Sep-2010
	Tcl-Version:	8.6
	Post-History:
-----

# Abstract

A C API and Tcl command are proposed which return the number of CPUs \(a.k.a.
Processors a.k.a. Cores\) in the system, portably wrapping the OS specific APIs
for doing so.

# Background and Motivation

With the relentless advance of multi-core chips it becomes sensible, IMVHO, to
have a portable method of determining the number of CPUs \(also called
Processors or Cores\) in the system.

This information is mostly important for the initialization of thread pools,
in order to have a sensible number of worker threads which provide the maximum
speedup without overloading the system. The general use-case the previous is
an example of is the dynamic reconfiguration of an application or library to
automatically adapt it to the resources available in the environment it finds
itself in. That is, this is useful for multi-process applications as well.

Semi-concrete examples: The CRIMP package is currently single-threaded. For
the best parallelization by threading, it should be possible to query the
number of processors the application can use. A web server like Wub can make
use of this functionality as well. They should not have to implement this on
their own, duplicating the functionality, or, worse, each having slightly
different implementations.

# C Level API

 > int **Tcl\_GetNumberOfProcessors**\(int _flags_\)

Returns the number of processors for the current system, as provided by the
OS. If the system is unable to provide this information the returned value is
'1', as at least one processors is necessary to run anything at all.

The _flags_ argument is not used. It is provided as a means of
extensibility. Something which can be used in the future to distinguish
between physical processors, hyperthreaded virtual processors, cores on a
chip, number of processor chips, and the like.  Right now such advanced
queries are out of the scope of the TIP.

The main point of having the 'flags' argument now is that future extensions
using it will not have to change the signature of the function.

# Script Level API

 > **info processors**

Returns the number of processors for the current system, as provided by
**Tcl\_GetNumberProcessors**\(0\).

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is provided at SourceForge
<https://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?aid=3065485> .

# Discussion

The stackoverflow messaging board has a question on the various OS-specific
APIs. See <http://stackoverflow.com/q/150355/301832>  for details.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

