# TIP 378: Fixing the Performance of TIP 280
	Author:         Andreas Kupries <andreask@activestate.com>
	Author:         Jeff Hobbs <jeffh@activestate.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        04-Oct-2010
	Tcl-Version:	8.6
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Ticket:     3081184
-----

# Abstract

A Tcl command is proposed which enable a user of Tcl to disable the most
performance intensive parts of the [[280]](280.md) implementation, at the loss of some
detail.

# Background and Motivation

[[280]](280.md) extended Tcl's abilities for introspection with the **info frame**
command able to determine the location of its call, i.e., the name of the file
the code is in, and the absolute line number in that file.

In the quest for the best possible detail one particular part of the
implementation had a great impact on the performance of bytecode execution,
doing complex stack/hash manipulations for each argument of each
INST\_INVOKE\_STK instruction to keep track of the location of scripts delivered
to **uplevel** commands as arguments of Tcl procedures \(i.e.,
implementations of control structures in Tcl\).

This TIP now proposes to put the execution of this part of [[280]](280.md)'s
implementation under user control, allowing them to trade **info
frame**-exactness for speed, and vice versa.

# Script Level API

 > **interp debug** _interp-path_ ?**-frame** ?_boolean_??

This API was chosen to be potentially extensible for other future interpreter
level control needs.

## Default Setting

This behavior will be turned off by default, unless Tcl is compiled with
-DTCL\_INTERP\_DEBUG\_FRAME or $::env\(TCL\_INTERP\_DEBUG\_FRAME\) is set at
interpreter creation time.

Note that this is a one-way switch because the **info frame** tracking is
maintained in a stack that must remain consistent once switched on.  Switching
off when deep in the stack would cause memory loss and possible crashes
without tracing on top of tracing, and it is felt that being an interp-level
switch, one-way switching should be sufficient for user needs.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is provided at SourceForge
<https://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?aid=3081184> .

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

