# TIP 379: Add a Command for Delivering Events Without Tk
	Author:		Will Duquette <will@wjduquette.com>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Vote:		Pending
	Created:	17-Oct-2010
	Post-History:	
	Keywords:	event
	Implementation-URL: http://www.wjduquette.com/notifier/hook-0.1.zip
-----

# Abstract

This proposal defines the **hook** ensemble command, which implements the
Subject/Observer pattern.  It allows _subjects_, which may be modules,
objects, widgets, and so forth, to synchronously call _hooks_ which may be
bound to an arbitrary number of subscribers, called _observers_.  A subject
may call any number of distinct hooks, and any number of observers can bind
callbacks to a particular hook called by a particular subject. Hook bindings
can be queried and deleted.

# Rationale

Tcl modules usually send notifications to other modules in two ways: via Tk
events, and via callback options like the text widget's **-yscrollcommand**
option.  Tk events are available only in Tk, and callback options require
tight coupling between the modules sending and receiving the notification.

Loose coupling between sender and receiver is often desirable, however.  In
Model/View/Controller terms, a View can send a command \(stemming from user
input\) to the Controller, which updates the Model.  The Model can then call a
hook _to which all relevant Views subscribe._  The Model is decoupled from
the Views, and indeed need not know whether any Views actually exist.

At present, Tcl/Tk has no standard mechanism for implementing loose coupling
of this kind.  This proposal defines a new command, **hook**, which
implements just such a mechanism.

# Hook Bindings

The **hook** command manages a collection of hook bindings.  A hook binding
has four elements:

   * A
     _subject_: the name of the entity that will be calling the hook.

   * The _hook_ itself. A hook usually reflects some occurrence in the life
     of the _subject_ that other entities might care to know about.  A
     _hook_ has a name, and may also have arguments.  Hook names are
     arbitrary strings.  Each _subject_ must document the names and
     arguments of the hooks it can call.

   * The name of the _observer_ that wishes to receive the _hook_ from
     the _subject_.

   * A command prefix to which the _hook_ arguments will be appended when
     the binding is executed.

## Subjects and Observers

For convenience, this TIP collectively refers to subjects and observers as
_objects_, while placing no requirements on how these _objects_ are
actually implemented.  An object can be a a TclOO or Snit or XOTcl object, a
Tcl command, a namespace, a module, a pseudo-object managed by some other
object \(as tags are managed by the Tk text widget\) or simply a well-known
name.

Subject and observer names are arbitrary strings; however, as **hook** might
be used at the package level, it's necessary to have conventions that avoid
name collisions between packages written by different people.

Therefore, any subject or observer name used in core or package level code
should look like a Tcl command name, and should be defined in a namespace
owned by the package.  Consider, for example, an ensemble command **::foo**
that creates a set of pseudo-objects and uses **hook** to send
notifications.  The pseudo-objects have names that are not commands and exist
in their own namespace, rather like file handles do.  To avoid name collisions
with subjects defined by other packages, users of **hook**, these
**::foo** handles should have names like **::foo::1**, **::foo::2**, and
so on.

Because object names are arbitrary strings, application code can use whatever
additional conventions are dictated by the needs of the application.

# Specification

The **hook** command is an ensemble command with the following subcommands:

## Bind Subcommand

This subcommand is used to create, update, delete, and query hook bindings.

 > **hook bind** ?_subject_? ?_hook_? ?_observer_? ?_cmdPrefix_?

Called with no arguments, **hook bind** returns a list of the subjects with
hooks to which observers are currently bound.

Called with one argument, a _subject_, **hook bind** returns a list of the
subject's hooks to which observers are currently bound.

Called with two arguments, a _subject_ and a _hook_, **hook bind**
returns a list of the observers which are currently bound to this _subject_
and _hook_.

Called with three arguments, a _subject_, a _hook_, and an _observer_,
**hook bind** returns the binding proper, the command prefix to be called
when the hook is called, or the empty string if there is no such binding.

Called with four arguments, **hook bind** creates, updates, or deletes a
binding.  If _cmdPrefix_ is the empty string, **hook bind** deletes any
existing binding for the _subject_, _hook_, and _observer_; nothing is
returned.  Otherwise, _cmdPrefix_ must be a command prefix taking as many
additional arguments as are documented for the _subject_ and _hook_. The
binding is added or updated, and the observer is returned.

If the _observer_ is the empty string, "", **hook** will create a new
binding using an automatically generated observer name of the form
**::hook::ob**<_number_>.  The automatically generated name will be
returned, and can be used to query, update, and delete the binding as usual.
If automated observer names are always used, the observer name effectively
becomes a unique binding ID.

### Binds During Calls

It is possible to call **hook bind** to create or delete a binding to a
_subject_ and _hook_ while in an observer binding for that same
_subject_ and _hook_.  The following rules determine what happens when
**hook bind $s $h $o $binding** is called during the execution of **hook
call $s $h**:

   * No binding is ever called after it is deleted.

   * When a binding is called, the most recently given command prefix is
     always used.

   * The set of observers whose bindings are to be called is determined when
     **hook call** begins to execute, and does not change thereafter, except
     that deleted bindings are not called.

In particular:

   * If $o's binding to $s and $h is deleted, and $o's binding has not yet
     been called during this execution of **hook call $s $h**, it will not
     be called.  \(Note that it might already have been called; and in all
     likelihood, it is probably deleting itself.\)

   * If $o changes the command prefix that's bound to $s and $h, and if $o's
     binding has not yet been called during this execution of **hook call $s
     $h**, the new binding will be called when the time comes.  \(But again,
     it is probably $o's binding that is is making the change.\)

   * If a new observer is bound to $s and $h, its binding will not be called
     until the next invocation of **hook call $s $h**.

### Discussion

**Optional Observers:** It has been suggested that the _observer_ argument
should follow the _cmdprefix_ argument; if it is omitted, an observer name
would be automatically generated.  However, the _observer_ name is
frequently used in practice, and is likely to be much shorter than the
_cmdprefix_, which might be quite long.  As a general rule, short arguments
following long ones tend to get lost visually; keeping the _observer_ before
the _cmdprefix_ leads to more easily readable code.

## Call Subcommand

 > **hook call** _subject hook_ ?_args..._?

This command is called when the named _subject_ wishes to call the named
_hook_.  All relevant bindings are called with the specified arguments in
the global namespace. Note that the bindings are called synchronously, before
**hook call** returns; this allows the _args_ to include references to
entities that will be cleaned up as soon as the hook has been called.

The order in which the bindings are called is not guaranteed.  If sequence
among observers must be preserved, define one observer and have its bindings
call the other callbacks directly in the proper sequence.

Because the **hook** mechanism is intended to support loose coupling, it is
presumed that the _subject_ has no knowledge of the observers, nor any
expectation regarding return values.  This has a number of implications:

   * **hook call** returns the empty string.

   * Normal return values from observer bindings are ignored.

   * Errors and other exceptional returns propagate normally by default.  This
     will rarely be what is wanted, because the subjects usually have no
     knowledge of the observers and will therefore have no particular
     competence at handling their errors.  That makes it an application issue,
     and so applications will usually want to define an **-errorcommand**.

If the **-errorcommand** configuration option has a non-empty value, its
value will be invoked for all errors and other exceptional returns in observer
bindings.  See **hook configure**, below, for more information on
configuration options.

Also, see below for possible extensions to **hook call**.

## Forget Subcommand

 > **hook forget** _object_

This command deletes any existing bindings in which the named object appears
as either the _subject_ or the _observer_.

Bindings deleted by **hook forget** will never be called again.  In
particular,

  * If an observer is forgotten during a call to **hook call**, any uncalled
    binding it might have had to the relevant subject and hook will **not**
    be called subsequently.

  * If a subject $s is forgotten during a call to **hook call $s $h**,
    **hook call** will return as soon as the current binding returns.  No
    further bindings will be called.

## Configuration Subcommands

 > **hook cget** _option_

This command returns the value of one of the **hook** command's
configuration options.

 > **hook configure** _option value_ ...

This command sets the value of one or more of the **hook** command's
configuration options:

 -errorcommand: If the value of this option is the empty string, "", then
    errors and other exception returns in binding scripts are propagated
    normally.  Otherwise, it must be a command prefix taking three additional
    arguments: a list \{_subject hook arglist observer_\}, the result string,
    and the return options dictionary.  Given this information, the
    **-errorcommand** can choose to log the error, call **interp
    bgerror**, delete the errant binding \(thus preventing the error from
    arising a second time\) and so forth.

 -tracecommand: The option's value should be a command prefix taking four
    arguments: a _subject_, a _hook_, a list of the hook's _argument
    values_, and a list of _objects_ the hook.  The command will be called
    for each hook that is called.  This allows the application to trace hook
    execution for debugging purposes.

# Example

The ::model module calls the <Update> hook in response to commands that
change the model's data:

	   hook call ::model <Update>

The .view megawidget displays the model state, and needs to know about model
updates.  Consequently, it subscribes to the ::model's <Update> hook.

	   hook bind ::model <Update> .view [list .view ModelUpdate]

When the ::model calls the hook, the .view's ModelUpdate subcommand will be
called.

Later the .view megawidget is destroyed.  In its destructor, it tells the
**hook** that it no longer exists:

	   hook forget .view

All bindings involving .view are deleted.

# Possible Additions

During discussions on the tcl-core mailing list, members suggested a number of
possible additions to the functionality described in the first draft of this
TIP.  Some small capabilities have been added in this draft; however, there
are two significant ones that I have elected to defer, for two reasons:

   * Though reasonable additions, they are somewhat orthogonal to the
     functionality provided here.

   * They are somewhat speculative, as they reflect patterns I've not actually
     used, whereas the functionality described above has been in use in real
     applications for the past five years.

Consequently, I'd rather not delay this TIP until these suggested additions
are mature.  If this TIP is accepted, then these additions can be considered
as TIPs in their own right.

On the other hand, they are genuinely interesting, so I want to mention them
here.

## Asynchronous Dispatch

The **hook call** command calls bindings synchronously, returning after all
bindings have been called.  An asychronous mode has been proposed, where
bindings would be called in the context of the event loop for even looser
coupling between the subject and the observers.  This is certainly doable;
however, the same effect can be achieved by calling **hook call** in an
**after** handler.

I've often considered adding a mode like this to our existing implementation,
but have always thought better of it in the end.

## Accumulating Binding Return Values

Two members of tcl-core have suggested that **hook call** would be useful to
support plug-in architectures if the return values of all bindings called were
properly captured.  This is an interesting notion; but I'm not sure how to get
it right.  In some use cases, it would be enough just to get a list of the
return values.  In other uses cases, the caller might want to know the
observer, the return value, and the complete dictionary of return options.

I don't want to build up all of this return information in the usual case; if
it isn't needed, there's no reason to spend the time accumulating it.
Consequently, what makes sense to me is an option or options that determine
what kind of information should be returned, e.g., **hook call ?options...?
$s $h ...**

Given that **hook call** currently returns the empty string, this
functionality can easily be added at a later time.

# Prototype Implementation

A prototype implementation is available at
<http://www.wjduquette.com/notifier/hook-0.1.zip> .  It is written in Tcl.  The
prototype implementation should work in both Tcl 8.5 and Tcl 8.6.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

