# TIP 383: Injecting Code into Suspended Coroutines
	Author:         Alexandre Ferrieux <alexandre.ferrieux@gmail.com>
	Author:         Miguel Sofer <msofer@users.sourceforge.net>
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <dkf@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        03-Dec-2010
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       debugging,coroutine,yielded
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-383
-----

# Abstract

This proposes two new commands. One, **coroinject**, that allows a programmer
to inject arbitrary code into a suspended coroutine, for execution on next
resumption, and the other, **coroprobe**, that allows a programmer to inject
arbitrary code into a suspended coroutine for immediate execution (making it
much easier to use for introspection).

# Rationale

When debugging complex coroutines - with many yield points and possibly rich
state in local variables - sometimes one would like to inspect their state
“from the outside”, i.e., at a point where they are suspended.

A typical situation is that of a big, single-threaded, event\+coro system,
where the coro happily enables/disables fileevents along its life, and the
fileevents are one way to resume the coro. At a given point \(bug\), things get
stalled, with the fileevents disabled. The obvious questions are:

 1. “where” is the coro \(at which yield site\)? and

 2. what are the values of its local variables?

Both these questions can be answered with the new **coroinject** primitive.
The idea is to force a resumption of the coro along with an “immediate
execution of extra code” directive, where the extra code says “dump the call
stack with **info level** and **info frame**”, or “dump the locals”, etc.

Another use would be to inject "**return -code return**", as an alternative
to renaming to \{\} for terminating the coro in a way that respects its
**catch**/**finally** termination handlers. Alternatively, returning with
an error code will have the effect of gathering call stack information in the
**-errorstack** options dictionary entry.

At the other end of the spectrum, the injected code can be completely
transparent: either with a forced resumption and injected code ending with
**yield**, or merely waiting for normal resumption when the app sees fit,
and injected code falling back to normal coro code.

Note that the feature is similar to a proc-entry trace, but coroutine
resumption is not currently a trace target.  Also, it is an intrinsically
"one-shot" mechanism, which makes it a better fit for its debugging purposes.

To make the use of **coroinject** simpler for the common introspection use
case, an extra command, **coroprobe** is included. That runs the code
immediately and produces the results immediately, including _making errors_ in
the running of the code _not appear inside the coroutine;_ faults in debugging
code should not cause failures in the code being debugged.

# Definition of coroinject

The new command:

 > **coroinject** _coroname_ _cmd_ ?_arg1 ..._?

prepends to the code to be executed on resumption of the currently suspended
coroutine, _coroname_, the following code:

 >  _cmd_ _arg1..._ _yieldtype_ _resumearg_

where _yieldtype_ is either **yield** or **yieldto**, depending on how the
coroutine yielded (allowing generic injection handler commands to be used),
and_resumearg_ is:

 1. the single argument passed to the resumption command _coroname_ when
    **yield** is used by _coroname_. If there is no resumption argument,
    _resumearg_ will be the empty string.
 
 2. the list of arguments passed to the resumption command _coroname_ when
    **yieldto** is used by _coroname_.
 
In turn, the result from the execution of _cmd_ will be seen by the
coroutine's code as the result of **yield**/**yieldto**.

Note that:

 1. Resumption itself must be done separately, by calling _coroname_ later,

 2. If **coroinject** is called several times on the same _coroname_
    before resuming it, the commands pile up in LIFO order.

 3. In combination, the appending of _resumearg_ and the use of the result
    of _cmd_ to provide the result of **yield**, will allow the following
    style of fully transparent injection:

            proc probe {x y type resumearg} {
                do things $x $y
                return $resumearg
            }
            coroinject C probe foo bar

    However, probing is more simply done with **coroprobe**.

# Definition of coroprobe

 > **coroprobe** _coroname_ _cmd_ ?_arg1 ..._?

runs the command _cmd_ (with the given arguments) _immediately_ in the
currently suspended coroutine, _coroname_, and gives the results of that
execution as the results of the **coroprobe** command. Errors in _cmd_ result
in errors from **coroprobe**, and not errors in the coroutine, _coroname_; the
**return** command cannot be used to make the coroutine terminate early
either. After **coroprobe** has run, the state of the coroutine will be the
same as before (assuming _cmd_ does not delete _coroname_ or alter any of its
local variables); for example, if it was waiting for multiple arguments before
(because it had used **yieldto**, it will continue to do so afterwards, and it
will resume at the same point in the code as it would have if **coroprobe**
had not be run.

Unlike with **coroinject**, no extra arguments are appended to _cmd_ when it
is executed beyond those suppled as part of the **coroprobe** call.

This combination of features means that it is possible to use this command
usefully with, say, **info frame** and **info level** to examine the state of
the coroutine.

        set f [coroprobe C info frame]
        puts "coroutine C @$f: [coroprobe C info frame $f]"

However, in general it is easier to put a more complex probe into a procedure
or lambda term:

        set vars [coroprobe C apply {{} {
            lmap var [uplevel 1 info locals] {
                upvar 1 $var val
                string cat $var -> $val
            }
        }}]
        puts "The vars of C are: $vars"

# Naming

Of course, the proposed **coroinject** is a placeholder for a suitable name
(and similarly **coroprobe**). Alternatives that also make sense are:
**::tcl::coroinject** and **interp coroinject**. Constructive bikeshedding
welcome.

# Reference Implementation

See the `tip-383` branch.

# Notes

The current **::tcl::unsupported::inject** implements most of the
functionality described here, minus the _yieldtype_ and _resumearg_ passing.
The _yieldtype_ value is determinable with **::tcl::unsupported::corotype**.

**coroprobe** can be mostly implemented using **coroinject**, but not
easily. In particular, the error handling is non-trivial and **info frame**
will be able to tell the difference consistently.

The **coroprobe** command is less general than **coroinject**, but is quite a
bit easier to use by virtue of being immediate and able to pass errors out.
However, there are use cases out there that would not be supported by
**coroprobe**, such as the operations on [the ‘every’ wiki
page](https://wiki.tcl-lang.org/page/every) that use
**::tcl::unsupported::inject** to do nice early termination of the worker
coroutines. Thus, having two commands is jusifiable. The unsupported version
of this has problems with processing the resumption value, which isn't a
problem when the resumption is done straight away (making its resumption value
moot), but that in turn can have problems with knowing how to re-yield so as
to not disrupt the coroutine, which is why the _yieldtype_ value is added (to
_allow_ the injected code to yield correctly).

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
