# TIP 389: Full support for Unicode 10.0 and later
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@users.sf.net>
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        23-Aug-2011
	Post-History:   
	Discussions-To: Tcl Core list
	Keywords:       Tcl
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to add full support for all characters in Unicode 10.0\+,
inclusive the characters >= **U\+010000**.

# Summary

In order to extend the range of the characters to more than 16 bits, the type
_Tcl\_UniChar_ is not big enough any more to hold all possible characters.
Changing the type of _Tcl\_UniChar_ to a 32-bit quantity is not an option, as
it will result in a binary API incompatibility.

The solution proposed in this TIP is to keep _Tcl\_UniChar_ a 16-bit
quantity, but to increase the value of TCL\_UTF\_MAX to 4 \(from 3\). Any
conversions from UTF-8 to _Tcl\_UniChar_ will convert any valid 4-byte UTF-8
sequence to a sequence of two Surrogate characters. All conversions from
UTF-16 to UTF-8 will make sure that any High Surrogate immediately followed by
a Low Surrogate will result in a single 4-byte UTF-8 character.

This can be done in a binary compatible way: No source code of existing
extensions need to be modified. As long as no characters >= **U\+010000** or
Surrogates are used, all functions provided by the Tcl library will function
as before. There are few functions which currently return a value of type
_Tcl\_UniChar_, those will be modified to return an int in stead.

# Rationale

As Unicode 10.0, and future Unicode versions, will supply more and more
characters outside the 16-bit range, it would be useful if Tcl supports
that as well.

# Specification

This document proposes:

 * Change the functions _Tcl\_UniCharToUtf_ and _UnicodeToUtfProc_ such
   that when they are fed with a valid High Surrogate followed by a Low
   Surrogate, the result will be a single 4-byte UTF-8 character.

 * Change the functions _Tcl\_UtfToUniChar_ and _UtfToUnicodeProc_ such
   that when they are fed with a valid 4-byte UTF-8 character, the first call
   will return a High Surrogate character, and the next call will return a Low
   Surrogate character.

 * The following functions, which currently return a Tcl\_UniChar, will be
   changed to return an int instead:

	 > \* _Tcl\_UniCharAtIndex_

	 > \* _Tcl\_UniCharToLower_

	 > \* _Tcl\_UniCharToTitle_

	 > \* _Tcl\_UniCharToUpper_

	 > \* _Tcl\_GetUniChar_

 * Extend tclUniData.c to include all Unicode 10.0 characters up to
   **U\+02FA20**.  A special case will be made for the functions
   _Tcl\_UniCharIsGraph_ and _Tcl\_UniCharIsPrint_ for the characters in the
   range **U\+0E0100** - **U\+0E01EF**, otherwise it would almost double the
   Unicode table size.

 * Extend the _Tcl\_UtfToUniChar_ function such that the invalid bytes
   0x80 up to 0x9F are interpreted as the cp1252 characters € up to Ÿ
   instead of the (not-existing) Unicode characters **U\+0080** - **U\+009F**.
   Since cp1252 is the mostly used Windows codepage, which is upwards
   compatible with ISO 8859-1, this adheres more to what's intuitively
   expected behavior. Many current UTF-8 converters nowadays use this.
   See also [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8#Invalid_byte_sequences)

 * If Tcl is compiled with -DTCL\_UTF\_MAX=6, use a different TCL\_STUB\_MAGIC
   value. Since extensions compiled with -DTCL\_UTF\_MAX=6 are binary
   incompatible with normally-compiled Tcl, this causes extensions
   compiled with this same options no longer being loadable in normal
   Tcl and reverse. Note that TCL\_UTF\_MAX=6 compiles are still not officially
   supported, a lot of additional fixes are needed to make it work right.

 * Change the Windows-only functions Tcl\_WinTchar2Utf and Tcl\_WinUtf2TChar
   to using only the Win32 API functions in its implementation. This means
   that the Tcl encoding system no longer needs to be initialized in
   order for those functions to work. (This cannot be done with TCL\_UTF\_MAX=3,
   because the Windows API might produce 4-byte UTF-8 sequences, which Tcl
   cannot handle then)

# Compatibility

As long as no Surrogates or characters >= **U\+010000** are used, all
functions behave exactly the same as before. The only way that
_Tcl\_UniCharToUtf_ can produce a 4-byte output is when Surrogates or
characters >= **U\+010000** are used.

Extension that want to be compatible with any Tcl version, can include tcl.h
as follows:

	#define TCL_UTF_MAX 4
	#include <tcl.h>

or they can call the C compiler with the additional argument -DTCL\_UTF\_MAX=4,
in order to be sure that UTF-8 representations of length 4 can be
handled. This way, the extension can be used with any Tcl version, whether it
supports Surrogates or not.

Apart from this, it is advisable to initialize the variable where the chPtr
argument from _Tcl\_UtfToUniChar_ points to, as this location is used to
remember whether the High Surrogate is already produced or not. Not doing so
when the first character of a string is a character > **U\+010000** might
result in a Low Surrogate character only. This danger, however unlikely, only
exists for the first character in a string, and it only occurs when the
\(random\) value is exactly equal to the expected High Surrogate.

# Caveats

In the current implementation "string length \\U10000" will return 2 in
stead of the expected 1. The reason for this is that many internal
operations convert the representation into UTF-16 format, which occupies
two surrogate characters. This might change in future Tcl implementations.
Correcting this would involve many internal changes, and the risk of
introducing crashes because of miscounting bytes (as have been reported
in the past, during the tip-389 branch implementation development).
Tcl is not the only language doing it this way: javascript does it as well.

This also means that functions line "string index", "string range" and
"string reverse" might give unexpected results when characters > **U\+010000**
are involved. Any index pointing to the middle of a 'double-length' Unicode
character will be handled as if the index points to just after the character
instead. So:

In Tcl 8.7 with TIP #389:

    % string length "a\U100000b"
    4
    % scan %c \U100000
    1048576  -> (this is the correct Unicode character)
    % string length [string index "a\U100000b" 1]
    2        -> (the Unicode character has length 2)
    % string length [string index "a\U100000b" 2]
    0        -> (So we cannot access the lower surrogate separately)

So, the "string length" of a Unicode character >U+FFFF is 2, and if you try to
split it in two separate characters that won't work: It will then be split
in a character with length 2 (the original one) and another character with
length 0 (the empty string).

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is available in the [tip-389 branch]
(https://core.tcl.tk/tk/timeline?r=tip-389).

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

