# TIP 390: A Logging API for Tcl
	Author:         Jeff Rogers <dvrsn@diphi.com>
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Created:        27-Oct-2011
	Vote:           Pending
	Post-History:	
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a standard API for logging in Tcl applications, both at the
Tcl and C level.

# Rationale

Logging is needed in most applications.  There is no standard, documented
logging API in Tcl, for either Tcl or C code, leading most people to roll
their own. The TIP proposes a standard Tcl and C API that handles the most
common logging functions.

The default implementation of the logger should just print the message \(with
substitutions performed as if with **format**\) to the standard error
channel.

# Specification

There shall be a logger associated with each Tcl interpreter, and a separate
global logger. As the global logger may be used by multiple threads at once,
it shall be protected by an appropriate mutex; it may only be used from C
code. Interpreter-specific loggers will be exposed within those interpreters.

## Tcl C API

 1. void **Tcl\_Log**\(Tcl\_Interp _\*interp_, Tcl\_LogLevel _level_, const
    char _\*message_, ...\)

    This is the main C api call; it logs the formatted message at the
    specified log level. If _interp_ is specified, it operates within the
    context of that interp; if NULL then it logs in a maner not associated
    with any interpreter.

 2. void **Tcl\_SetLogLevel**\(Tcl\_Interp _\*interp_, Tcl\_LogLevel _level_\)

    Instructs the logging system to set the logging level to the given value
    for the logger associated with the given _interp_ (or the global logger
    when _interp_ is NULL).  Legal levels (from lowest to highest) are
    `TCL_LOG_DEV`, `TCL_LOG_DEBUG`, `TCL_LOG_INFO`, `TCL_LOG_NOTICE`,
    `TCL_LOG_WARNING`, `TCL_LOG_ERROR`, `TCL_LOG_FATAL`, `TCL_LOG_BUG`.

 3. Tcl\_LogLevel **Tcl\_GetLogLevel**\(Tcl\_Interp _\*interp_\)
 
    Retrieves the current logging level for the logger associated with the
    given _interp_ (or the global logger when _interp_ is NULL). The result
    will be one of the values documented above.

 4. int **Tcl\_LogLevelEnabled**\(Tcl\_Interp _\*interp_, Tcl\_LogLevel _level_\)
 
    Returns a boolean value that says whether logging at _level_ is enabled for
    the logger associated with the given _interp_ (or the global logger when
    _interp_ is NULL). This is useful when the calculation of the arguments to
    **Tcl\_Log** is expensive.

 5. void **Tcl\_SetLogHandler**\(Tcl\_Interp _\*interp_, const Tcl\_LogHandler _\*logHandler_, ClientData _clientData_\)

    Where `Tcl_LogHandler` is defined as (approximately):

	    typedef struct Tcl_LogHandler {
	        Tcl_LogHandlerProc *logHandlerProc;
	        Tcl_SetLogLevelProc *setLogLevelProc;
	        Tcl_FreeLogHandlerProc *freeLogHandlerProc;
	    } Tcl_LogHandler;

	    int Tcl_LogHandlerProc(ClientData clientData, Tcl_Interp *interp,
	            Tcl_LogLevel level, Tcl_Obj *message);
	    void Tcl_SetLogLevelProc(ClientData clientData, Tcl_Interp *interp,
	            Tcl_LogLevel level);
	    void Tcl_FreeLogHandlerProc(ClientData clientData);

    Installs a new log handler for a specified _interp_ or globally.  If no
    log handler is installed, the default action is to print the formatted
    message on standard error if the message level is equal to or greater than
    the loglevel; in the context of a particular interpreter the default
    action is to call the configured log handler \(which does the same thing
    by default\). The log handler callback must be non-NULL; it returns a
    standard Tcl result code, but if the global log handler returns non-TCL_OK
    then Tcl will panic. The set log level callback can be NULL if the log
    handler wishes to be notified of the current logging level.

    The _clientData_ is an arbitrary pointer that is passed through by Tcl
    unexamined; if the free log handler callback is non-NULL, it will be
    called to release whatever the _clientData_ points to when the log handler
    is changed.

    Note that when a logging event happens and is of a level high enough to be
    processed, the _message_ and subsequent arguments will be formatted into a
    `Tcl_Obj*` value prior to delivery to the log handler (as if with
    `Tcl_ObjPrintf`).

## Tcl Script API

The corresponding Tcl API is:

 1. **interp logger** ?_loggerCommandFragment_?

    Gets or sets the log handler for the executing interpreter.  The log
    handler (which will be a list of at least one element) will have these
    arguments appended on invoke: _level message args_

 2. **interp loglevel** ?_level_?
 
    Gets or sets the current logging level for the executing interpreter. The
    _level_, if provided, must be one of: **dev**, **debug**, **info**,
    **notice**, **warning**, **error**, **fatal**, or **bug**; they correspond
    to the levels defined above for **Tcl\_SetLogLevel**.

 3. **log** _level message ..._

    Tcl equivalent of `Tcl_Log()`; if _level_ is at or above the log level of
    the current inerpreter, _message_ will be formatted with the remaining
    arguments (as in `format`) and then sends them to the interpreter's
    configured logger.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
