# TIP 392: Allow Bignums to be Disabled at Runtime on a Per-Interp Basis
	Author:		Joe Mistachkin <joe@mistachkin.com>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Pending
	Created:	30-Oct-2011
	Keywords:	bignum,runaway,safe,math,precision,integer,tcl
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Post-History:	
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes the ability to enable or disable all use of bignums at
runtime on a per-interpreter basis.  The mechanism being presented to
accomplish this goal has been designed to be generic enough so that it can be
used for other per-interpreter configuration parameters in the future.

# Rationale

As of Tcl version 8.5, almost any integer math calculation can result in
bignums being used.  Normally, this does not pose a serious problem; however,
there are circumstances in which this can exhaust key system resources, such
as memory or CPU time.  Unlike other similar resource exhaustion problems,
this one cannot be prevented by use of **interp create -safe**, **interp
limit**, **interp cancel**, or similar mechanisms.  If Tcl is being used in
an embedding scenario, this has the potential to negatively impact the entire
application or system.  If Tcl is being used to evaluate marginally trusted or
untrusted scripts in a safe interpreter, this can result in a
denial-of-service \(DoS\) attack.

# Specification

A new **interp configure** script command will be added, as follows:

 > **interp configure** _path_ ?_name_? ?_value_?

This command instructs Tcl to modify or query the value of the named
configuration parameter _name_ in the interpreter identified by _path_.

## Arguments

 > _path_

This argument is required and specifies the interpreter to be reconfigured. An
empty string may be used to indicate the current interpreter.

 > _name_

This argument is optional.  If this argument is not supplied, the current list
of configuration parameter names for the interpreter identified by _path_
will be returned.

 > _value_

This argument is optional.  If this argument is not supplied, the current
value of the named configuration parameter for the interpreter identified by
_path_ will be returned; otherwise, the current value of the configuration
parameter will be changed to the specified value.

## C API

 > Tcl\_Obj\* **Tcl\_InterpConfigure**\(Tcl\_Interp\* _interp_,
   Tcl\_Obj\* _nameObjPtr_, Tcl\_Obj\* _valueObjPtr_\)

The **Tcl\_InterpConfigure** function gets or sets the named configuration
parameter for the specified interpreter.  The _nameObjPtr_, if not NULL,
must be a string containing the name of a known configuration parameter;
otherwise, NULL will be returned and the interpreter result will be modified
to contain an appropriate error message.  The _valueObjPtr_, if not NULL,
must have a value convertible to the type required by the configuration
parameter being set; otherwise, NULL will be returned and the interpreter
result will be modified to contain an appropriate error message.  If
_valueObjPtr_ is NULL, the current value of the named configuration
parameter will be returned instead of being changed.  If _nameObjPtr_ is
NULL, the complete list of known configuration parameter names will be
returned.  The caller is responsible for managing the reference count of the
returned value.

# Configuration Parameters

Upon interpreter creation, all configuration parameters start with a default
value.  The default value for a configuration parameter is considered to be
part of the formal interface.

Initially, the only supported configuration parameter will be **bignums**.

When setting the **bignums** configuration parameter, the value must be
convertible to a boolean.  When the value of this configuration parameter is
false, any math operation that would require using bignums to calculate will
instead be limited to the precision available in the **Tcl\_WideInt** type.
The default value of this configuration parameter will be true \(i.e. use of
bignums will be enabled by default, preserving backward compatibility\).

# Reference Implementation

Not yet complete; however, it will eventually be available on the
**tip-392** branch of the Tcl source code repository.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

