# TIP 393: Add -command Option to lsearch
	Author:         Pawel Salawa <pawelsalawa@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        25-Apr-2011
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Implementation-URL: http://sqlitestudio.pl/tcl/patches/tip-393-lsearch-command.patch
-----

# Abstract

This document describes new option for **lsearch** named **-command** that
lets the developer define a custom comparision algorithm for searching for an
element of a list.

# Rationale

The **-command** option would be very useful when someone wants to look for
element on list, that contains objects \(TclOO, Itcl, etc\), or simply Tcl
dicts. Specifying a command lets a developer to decide what data from objects
in a list is important for the comparison.

This is effectively introducing the **-command** option from **lsort** to
**lsearch**.

# Specification

The option **-command** takes additional argument, which is a name of a
command prefix that implements the comparison. The command prefix will have
two extra arguments added during evaluation, being \(1\) the element of the list
and \(2\) the pattern that is being sought. Thus, a suitable command might be
defined like:

	    proc searchCommand {listElement pattern} {...}

And used like:

	    lsearch -command searchCommand $list $pattern

The command must return a boolean value, where true means that the element
matches the pattern.  Since the **-command** option specifies a comparision
method, therefor it's treated the same way as **-exact**, **-glob**,
**-regexp** and **-sorted** options are. It also causes some options
\(e.g., **-integer**, **-nocase**\) to be ignored.

# Reference Implementation

<http://sqlitestudio.pl/tcl/patches/tip-393-lsearch-command.patch>

Patch made against 8.6.0 beta.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

