# TIP 402: General Platform UNC Support
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@users.sf.net>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        16-Jul-2011
	Post-History:   
	Discussions-To: Tcl Core list
	Keywords:       Tcl
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

Both Windows and Cygwin interpret paths starting with **//** as a special
prefix, indicating that the path has the form: **//server/share/file\_path**.
Windows has built-in handling of such paths built-in. UNIX doesn't have this.
It could be implemented through a VFS extension, but there is one problem:
File normalization on UNIX collapes multiple slashes into a single slash, so
this would convert the UNC path into a normal path. This makes it impossible
to implement a VFS extension which uses **//** as prefix, implementing
connection to a Samba server using the UNC path format.

# Rationale

At the moment, Cygwin and Windows have built-in a special case that paths
starting with double-slash will not be collapsed into a single slash. UNIX
does not do that. This change will allow a single uniform format for accessing
\(Samba\) shares on external machines using the path format
**//server/share/file\_path**. On Windows and Cygwin this already works,
because it is built-in Windows functionality.  On UNIX a VFS extension could
be developed which does the same.

# Specification

This document proposes:

 * Extend the special case built-in for Windows and Cygwin to UNIX, so paths
   starting with double-slash will no longer normalize to paths starting with
   a single slash.

	 > **POTENTIAL INCOMPATIBILITY**

 * As **//** becomes a special prefix, the **file split** will return
   **//** as its first list element when the original path starts with a
   double slash.

# Compatibility

On UNIX, this means that paths like **//usr/bin/tclsh** might no longer do
what it did earlier, if a VFS exists which uses **//** as path prefix. If no
such VFS exists, it will probably still work, only comparing normalized paths
will no longer regard **//<foo>** as equal to **/<foo>**.

Handling of multiple slashes in other locations of the string will not
change. So normalizing **/foo//bar** will still give **/foo/bar**.  The
most likely cause of multiple slashes appearing in a path is because of
appending a file name to a path which already ends with a slash, e.g.

	set dir "somedir/"
	set path $dir/filename

Of course, the **file join** command does not have this danger:

	set dir "somedir/"
	set path [file join $dir filename]

On Windows and Cygwin, there is no change in behavior at all.

# Alternatives

Variations are possible in the handling of paths starting with 3 or more
slashes. The current TIP implementation collapes more than 2 slashes to
exactly 2 slashes, as the current Windows and Cygwin implementations do.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is available at <http://core.tcl.tk/tcl> in branch
_jn-unc-vfs_.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

