# TIP 408: Allow Any Command for expr Functions
	Author:		Brian Griffin <brian_griffin@mentor.com>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Pending
	Created:	17-Aug-2012
	Post-History:	
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
-----

# Abstract

Proposed expansion of what constitutes a function in an **expr** expression.

# Rationale: Nested expr Calls

The **expr** command in Tcl is the only way to perform math and comparison
operations.  Tcl's variable and command substitution rules allow for great
flexibility, although the syntax does not lead to great readability,
especially due to the ordering imposed on substitutions. For example, in the
expression:

	 expr {[lindex $data $start] > 4}

the command substitution \([...]\) is performed before the expression can be
parsed for evaluation, and, in order for the command substitution to be
parsed, the variable substitution \($\) must be performed. The consequences of
this ordering means that arguments to commands cannot themselves be
expressions unless the argument is itself a command substitution involving
**expr**. This means, for example, that to compute an index value,
**expr** must be recursively called:

	 expr {[lindex $data [expr {$start + 2}]] > 4}

However, when using a math function, the command substitution ordering does
not apply since the function is part of the expression syntax:

	 expr {pow($x + 2, 2)}

It seems reasonable and useful if any Tcl command can be called using function
syntax:

	 expr {lindex($data, $start + 2) > 4}

The common command substitution pattern has lead many developers to end up
writing things like:

	 if {[expr {$a+$b}] > 7} ...

In hindsight, such statements look ridiculous, but it works and it follows the
same pattern as the **lindex** case above.  If subexpressions could be
evaluated directly by the enclosing **expr** operations, this would greatly
simplify the overall expression and make it more readable and thereby more
maintainable, and hopefully, less error prone.

The goal here is to reduce the instances of recursive **expr** calls in an
expression.  It seems overly complex and confusing to read, and to have to use
command substitution syntax inside what is already an **expr** operation.

# Proposed Changes

The proposal is to simply apply normal Tcl command resolution rules to
**expr** functions.  The one caveat is that **tcl::mathfunc** namespace is
always searched first.

I see this as a continuation to [[232]](232.md).

# Rejected Alternatives

This can already be accomplished today by creating alias functions in the
**tcl::mathfunc** namespace, but this mechanism is awkward in that:

 1. It must be defined beforehand for the set of commands used or intended to
    be used in expressions,

 2. For OO and namespace code, some specialized duplication is also required,
    and

 3. It can lead to confusion when it's not clear why some commands work as
    functions and others don't.

# Proof of Concept

\(Thanks and credit to Frédéric Bonnet\)

A quick & dirty proof of concept with unknown handlers:

	proc mathproc {cmd args} {
	    if {[namespace qualifiers $cmd] eq "tcl::mathfunc"} {
	        return [uplevel [list [namespace tail $cmd]] $args]
	    }
	    uplevel [list ::unknown $cmd] $args
	}
	namespace unknown mathproc
	
	set l [expr {list(1,2,3)}]
	=> 1 2 3
	
	expr {lindex($l,2)}
	=> 3
	
	expr {expr(join($l,"+"))}
	=> 6

# Reference Implementation

None currently

# Copyright

Copyright \(c\) 2012 by GriffinTk

This document is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0
Unported License <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.en_US> .

