# TIP 409: UDP in Tcl
	Author:         Alexandre Ferrieux <alexandre.ferrieux@gmail.com>
	Author:         Colin McCormack <colin@chinix.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        17-Aug-2012
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       udp,datagram,message
	Obsoletes:      391
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This TIP  adds support for UDP in  Tcl, with a pure  event approach to
packet  reception  \(as  opposed  to  hijacking  the  existing  channel
infrastructure\).

# Rationale

UDP support  is a  long-awaited feature in  Tcl. Some  extensions have
traditionally supported it through the channel abstraction. This is of
course doable, but  there is a non-negligible cost  in both complexity
and  performance due  to the  impedance mismatch  between  the "fluid"
model  behind channels and  the "granular"  world of  datagrams \(where
boundaries are significant\).  Another  discrepancy is the existence of
\(per-packet\) metadata, like the source address  and port of an incoming UDP
packet, which do not fit nicely in the \(per-connection\) options of the
channel API \(via **fconfigure**\).

Once this  mismatch is acknowledged, it  is easy to  identify a better
home for UDP in Tcl: let it  be a direct event source \(for the receive
side\), just like Tk or Snack.

Indeed, hooking a callback for  packet reception is a natural fit with
Tcl's event-driven  tradition, while preserving  packet boundaries and
easily exposing per-packet metadata.

Sending  is trivially  handled by  a direct  per-packet call  \(but not
disguised as a **puts**\).  Again, this naturally allows for boundary
preservation and metadata specification.

This TIP asks for UDP-in-the core for two strong reasons:

 - it   enables   another   important   core
   feature:   asynchronous 
   \(event-driven\) DNS lookups

 - the C runtime supports it without extra libraries \(unlike USB or 
   Bluetooth\)

We then believe that the ubiquity of the need and the lack of external
dependencies justify  for UDP the  first-class status that  TCP enjoys
\(regardless of the channel vs event models\). Note that an acceptable compromise would be a bundled extension, ie distributed-with-the-core \(in "pkgs/"\).

# Specification

The new  **udp** ensemble hosts three subcommands: **new**, **create**, and **names**

 > **udp new** ?_options_?

 > **udp create** _name_ ?_options_?

both create an UDP endpoint ;

 > **udp names**

returns the list of existing such endpoints.

## Lifecycle

Following the  traditions of  Tk and Snack,  **udp new**  and **udp
create** return  a Tcl command, which  takes subcommands implementing
the  needed  verbs.  By analogy  with the  corresponding  TclOO  constructors,

 * **new**   generates   the    command   name   internally,   in   the **::tcl::udp** namespace

 * **create** takes an extra _name_ argument providing the target command name, either fully qualified, or relative to the current namespace.

 An UDP endpoint is thus created by:

		   set u [udp new ...]

or

	   udp create foo ...

 Once created, its configuration can be tweaked by:

 >  $u **configure** _-option_ _value_

and retrieved with

 >   set value [$u **configure** -_option_]

or 

 >   set fullconf [$u **configure**]

To destroy the endpoint, use:

 >   $u **destroy**

or, as in Tk, destroy the command:

 >   **rename** $u \{\}

or the whole namespace.

## Status of options

Among options, a few may only be specified on creation:

 > - local interface\+port

 > - \(optional\) connect\(\) target's address\+port

 > - reuse flag \(described in Advanced Features\)

while all the  other options may be specified  _both_ on creation or
through [$u configure].

## Addresses and Ports

The first two creation-only options have the following syntax:

 > set u [**udp new** ?**-local** _address_port_? ]

 > set u [**udp new** ?**-remote** _address_port_? ]

where _address\_port_ pairs are represented as 2-element Tcl lists.

 > set address\_port [list $address $port]

Addresses can be  given either as numeric IP \(v4  or v6\) addresses, or
as  hostnames; in  the latter  case, a  synchronous DNS  resolution is
performed before actual use, just like for **socket**.

In the case of **-local**, $address can be specified as "\*", meaning
INADDR\_ANY, and  $port can be  0, asking for  the OS to select  a free
port. Thus a dynamic port on all interfaces can be requested with

	   set u [udp new -local [list * 0]]

In case of port 0, after creation of the endpoint, the actual port
chosen by the OS can be retrieved with [$u configure]:

	   puts "Local port is: [lindex [$u configure -local] 1]"

In  the case of  **-remote**, both  address and  port must  be fully
specified.  The semantics, as is well known, is to tell the kernel \(a\)
to forbid  sending to  any other destination,  and \(b\) to  discard all
incoming packets sent by another source.

## Sending a Message

Sending is done, unsurprisingly, with the **send** verb:

 > $u **send** _payload_ ?_dest\_addr\_port_?

where _dest\_addr\_port_ is a pair as above.

Its  blocking  semantics is  that  of  the underlying  send\(\)/sendto\(\)
system calls:  it typically  returns immediately, though  the hardware
may buffer the data for some time, and delivery is not guaranteed. The
_payload_  is interpreted  as a  byte  array that  holds the  entire
content of the UDP message to send.

The destination parameter can be omitted if the endpoint has been created
with the **-remote** option \(connected mode\).

## Receiving a message asynchronously

Asynchronous \(i.e. event-driven\) message reception is done by specifying a listener callback to **new/create** or **configure**:

 > $u **configure -listener** _command\_prefix_

Subsequently, when an incoming packet hits Tcl in the event loop, the
_command\_prefix_ is called with the endpoint identifier, payload and
metadata:

 > \{\*\}_command\_prefix_ $u _payload_ _metadata\_dict_

where  _payload_  is   the  byte  array  of  the   UDP  payload  and _metadata\_dict_ is a dict containing at least two options:

 >   **-remote** _address\_port_

 >   **-local** _address\_port_

When read from options or  metadata, all address components apart from
"\*" are returned in numeric form; no reverse DNS is ever performed.

Note  that _-local_  may carry  more information  than  a configured
_-local_ where the address part  is "\*", by identifying which of the
system's several interfaces was targeted.

Also note  that  _command\_prefix_  is  a single  command,  possibly  with
arguments, that  will be  expanded on invocation  \(hence it must  be a
proper list\);  it is  \*not\* an arbitrary  script as in  Tk's **bind_
tradition.

When _command\_prefix_ is the empty  list \(which is the default\), the
notifier gives up  interest in the underlying UDP  socket; this allows
to  keep the  port  bound while  letting  the OS  buffer any  incoming
packets  \(up  to  a   configurable  limit\)  without  any  script-level
handling, while  leaving the  event loop active.   This is  similar to
setting a **fileevent** on a channel to the empty string.

## Receiving a message synchronously

Synchronous message reception is done with the **recv** verb:

 > set payload [$u **recv** _metadata_dict_var_]

The payload is returned as a byte array, and the variable passed as argument receives the metadata dict just described.

## Advanced features

The following few verbs and options control extra IP features that are
typically useful in popular UDP applications like media streaming:

 > $u **configure -sendbuffer** _buffersize_

 > $u **configure -receivebuffer** _buffersize_

Set the OS's send \(resp. receive\) buffer sizes to the given values \(in bytes\).

 > $u **join** _multiaddr_ ?**-source** _sourceaddr_?

Joins the multicast group _multiaddr_, optionally using IGMPv3's source
membership target _sourceaddr_.

 > $u **leave** _multiaddr_ ?**-source** _sourceaddr_?

Leaves the same multicast group with or without source membership.

 > set u [**udp new -reuse 1**]

Sets the SO\_REUSEADDR socket option, so that multiple processes may bind to the same local port and interface, and receive the same packets. Creation-time only.

 > $u **configure -ttl** _ttl_

Sets the TTL of subsequent outgoing packets. Some operating systems typically reduce the default TTL to one for multicast packets; this override may thus come in handy.

# Rejected Alternatives

 * Token-based API \(like for channels\) instead of
   commands: would need  
   extra machinery \(a new Tcl\_ObjType\). Moreover, the command style 
   gives reflection for free: a simple proc can emulate an UDP endpoint,   
   and is compatible with all OO schemes.

 * Address\+Port pairs as dicts or
   urls: would hamper performance for no 
   added value

 * Listener as specific subcommand instead of
   option: R/W semantics is 
   actually that of an option; a subcommand would preclude the direct 
   specification of the listener on creation ; analogy with the -command 
   of **fcopy**, **http**, or Tk widgets. 

# Sources of Inspiration

This TIP builds on experience with previous attempts at UDP extensions: TclUDP, ceptcl, Duft, along with intensive practice with unpublished work, and borrows ideas from all of them.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

