# TIP 416: New Options for 'load': -global and -lazy
	Author:         Christian Delbaere <cdelbaere@rogers.com>
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <nijtmans@users.sf.net>
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        31-Oct-2012
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
	Tcl-Branch:     frq-3579001
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes enhancing the Tcl **load** command with the additional
options **-global** and **-lazy**. It is implemented on top of [[357]](357.md), by
defining a meaning to the **flags** parameter already defined there.

# Rationale

Platforms that use the _dlopen\(\)_ function to Tcl **load** shared modules
at runtime provide options to control how the library is loaded:

 * global vs. local symbol scoping

 * lazy vs. now symbol resolution

Currently, Tcl's **load** command has hard coded defaults for these options
and they cannot be overridden within a Tcl script.  This imposes constraints on
the internal implementation of the modules intended to be loaded into the
interpreter.  This is especially problematic for modules that provide Tcl
scripting bindings for existing C\+\+ APIs.  Often, the C\+\+ APIs make
assumptions about the availability and scoping of their symbols.

Tcl binding packages for C\+\+ APIs are often created by a different development
group than the one that created the original C\+\+ API.  Because the two groups
are independent, the C\+\+ API maintainers will not always be open or able to
change their code to fit the requirements to be loaded into a scripting
language.

A common problem occurs when the same static variable is present in two
different Tcl modules.  For some applications, the variable is meant to be
shared across modules \(global scoping\), while in other applications, the
variable must have its own value within each module \(local scoping\).  If the
wrong scoping is chosen, the underlying code will not work correctly; rather
it will yield strange bugs and / or crashes.

Also in the domain of Tcl bindings for C\+\+ APIs: it's convenient for the
binding package maintainers to have binary compatibility between one version
of the Tcl API and several versions of the C\+\+ API.  The **-lazy** flag for
Tcl's load command will provides the feature necessary for this flexibility,
since it can be used to defer missing symbol errors.  So, users can often
continue to run their scripts as long as they restrict themselves to calling
only commands where the symbols are available.

Of course, some applications work best when **load** is called with
**-global** and some work best without it.  The same can be said for
**-lazy**.  By providing these options, Tcl will allow programmers to choose
the best fit for their application.

# Specification

In [[357]](357.md), the _Tcl\_LoadFile_ is given as:

 > EXTERN int
   **Tcl\_LoadFile**\(
       Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_,
       Tcl\_Obj \*_pathPtr_,
       const char \*_symbols_[],
       int _flags_,
       void \*_procPtrs_,
       Tcl\_LoadHandle \*_handlePtr_\);

The meaning of the _flags_ parameter is not defined in TIP \#357, except
that the current value should be 0. This TIP defines the meaning of the first
two bits of this parameter:

	#define TCL_LOAD_GLOBAL 1
	#define TCL_LOAD_LAZY 2

Any combination \(logical or\) of those two bits can be given to the _flags_
parameter. The remaining bits are meant for future extension and are
currently ignored, but should be set to 0.

The **load** command will get two new options:

Current specification:

 > **load** _fileName_ ?_packageName_ ?_interp_??

Recommended specification:

 > **load** ?**-global**? ?**-lazy**? ?**--**? _fileName_
   ?_packageName_ ?_interp_??

# Discussion

Not all platforms may support library loading to a degree required for this
TIP functionality.  In that case, the additional options just act as if they
were not there. The reference implementation works on most modern UNIX systems
and MacOSX, which use _dlopen\(\)_ or _NSLinkModule\(\)_. Windows does not allow
lazy symbol resolution or global scoping, so the options have no effect on Windows.

The **load** command will determine the use of the new form by checking if
more than one argument is given and the first argument starts with a **-**.
This should not affect any existing extensions, as dynamic library filenames
beginning with **-** are rare.

Note that use of the **-global** or **-lazy** option may lead to crashes in your
application later \(in case of symbol conflicts resp. missing symbols\), which cannot
be detected during the **load**. So, only use this when you know what you are doing,
you will not get a nice error message when something is wrong with the loaded library.

# Examples

Load a module with the defaults \(local scoping, "now" resolution\)

	 load module.so

Load the module with global scoping and "now" resolution

	 load -global module.so

Load the module with global scoping and lazy resolution

	 load -global -lazy module.so

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is available in the **frq-3579001** branch; see
<https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?r=frq-3579001>

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

