# TIP 417: Use Explicit Option Names for "file tempfile"
	Author:		Christophe Curis <christophe.curis@free.fr>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Vote:		Pending
	Created:	16-Nov-2012
	Post-History:
	Keywords:	Tcl, future expansion, extensibility
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes altering the way in which optional arguments are specified
to **file tempfile** \(see [[210]](210.md)\) to make them easier to understand and
extend in the future.

# Rationale

The current documentation for **file tempfile** states that there are two
optional arguments using a fixed order. This has some limits:

 * it is not possible to use the second argument without the first

 * being an infrequently-used function, having a fixed order implies that a
   look to the manual page will be obligatory to make sure of the order

 * this inhibits potential for any future expansion of the command.

Switching to option/value format will make the optional arguments easier to
understand.

# Proposal

The syntax of the command would be changed to:

 > **file tempfile** ?_options..._?

with supported _options_:

 * **-namevar**
   _variable_: Specifies a variable for receiving the file name.

 * **-template**
   _template_: Defines a template for the file name.

This syntax would allow:

 * easy extension in the future, as any option name can be added,

 * ability to use any of the options in any order,

 * an explicit syntax making the code easier to read and understand.

# Reference Implementation

No implementation is available now, but the change is probably not complex;
the priority have been placed on raising the subject before the release of the
final 8.6 version of Tcl.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

