# TIP 418: Add [binary] Subcommands for In-Place Modification
	Author:         Jeff Rogers <dvrsn@diphi.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        27-Aug-2012
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl,binary data
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes adding new subcommands to the **binary** to better enable
parsing and manipulation of binary values.

# Rationale

The **binary** command efficiently deals with creating new objects or
completely parsing existing ones, but it does not handle modifying existing
binary objects or parsing them a little bit at a time.  A few new subcommands
would greatly improve the performance of these operations on large objects.

## Variable vs. Value

While it will be possible to implement these modification operations as
standard copy-on-write operations taking a value instead of a variable name, I
believe this would result in copying unless the well-known but still clumsy
technique of unsetting the variable after reading it \(i.e., [K $x [set x {}]]\) 
is used. This TIP is intended to fix this by providing a more
convenient and simpler-to-use mechanism which also admits more efficient
implementation.

# Specification

Two new core subcommands are proposed: **binary edit** modifies an existing
byte array "in place"; and **binary scanshift** parse data from a byte array
and removes the data that was parsed.  The intent is that additional commands
can be built on top of these in library code.

The existing **binary** commands already make use of an internal cursor;
that notion is extensively used by these new commands.

## Binary Edit

 > **binary edit** _varName formatStr_ ?_value value ..._?

This is similar to **binary format** except that the initial value of the
new byte array is an existing object stored in a variable rather than an array
of nulls.

Format specifiers in _formatStr_ are as in **binary format** except:

 * fixed-width format specifiers \(e.g., **c**, **s**, **i**\) that do not
   have enough values in their corresponding argument \(importantly, if they
   have 0 values\) move the cursor by the appropriate width.

 * New **z** and **Z** format specifiers are introduced that move the
   cursor forward or backward in the binary string without writing anything
   and consume no arguments. **Z** is a synonym for "X", provided for
   symmetry.  A count of "**\***" for the "**z**" format moves the cursor
   to the end of the existing object.

After the format string and all arguments have been processed, the length of
the string is adjusted to end at the current cursor position.

Thus, a format string that starts with "z\*" will append to the existing value,
and one that ends with "z\*" will keep the length the same.

## Binary Scanshift

 > **binary scanshift** _varName formatStr_ ?_var var var ..._?

This works like **binary scan** except that after the format string has been
processed and all variables assigned to, all data in the string before the
ending location of the cursor is discarded.

Thus,

	binary scanshift bvar c byte1
	binary scanshift bvar c byte2
	binary scanshift bvar c byte3

Will put the first 3 bytes of the binary _$bvar_ into _byte1_, _byte2_,
and _byte3_, with _bvar_ being subsequently three bytes shorter \(the
missing bytes being the first three\).

This is useful to avoid keeping a separate external cursor variable that must
be incremented and re-used on each iteration.

## Additional Library Commands

Suggested additional library commands are **poke** and **append**. The
arguments to **binary poke** will be:

 > **binary poke** _varName index formatStr_ ?_var ..._?

This moves the cursor to a specified index, then overwrite with the specified
format string.  Implemented as

	      binary edit varName "@${index} $formatStr z*" var ...

The arguments to **binary append** will be:

 > **binary append** _varName formatStr_ "?_var ..._?

This appends the given formatted data to an existing var.  Implemented as

	      binary edit varName "z* $formatStr" ?var ...?"

# Implementation Notes

Efficient implementation of the "**scanshift**" subcommand requires a new
"offset" field in the ByteArray structure and any operations that read the
object \(particularly duplicating it and updating the string representation\)
need to be aware of this field.  All external interfaces should be unaffected,
as the ByteArray structure type is private to tclBinary.c, And since it's
internal, EIAS is not violated.

When extending an existing byte array with the "**edit**" subcommand, care
should be taken with memory allocation to avoid repeated _realloc\(\)_ and
_memcpy\(\)_ operations.  It is a reasonable assumption that a given byte
array will be extended repeatedly or not at all beyond the initial creation.
So a memory allocation strategy is to allocate the exact length initially
\(i.e., when adjusting the size from 0 to non-zero\) and allocating double the
requested length subsequently a typical allocation-doubling strategy should
work well.  A double allocation should not be needed for an initial extension
\(i.e., extending from 0 to some length\) as that is typically the case when a
binary object is first created, and most binary objects will probably not be
extended; but once extended it is reasonable to prepare for more of the same.

After numerous "**scanshift**" operations there will be wasted space at the
beginning of the memory allocated for the data.  One strategy for keeping this
under control would be to move the live data to the beginning of the allocated
space when the offset is larger than the live data, so that the memory could
be copied without worrying about overlap; and this would also leave the
allocation size at roughly double the live data size.

# Reference Implementation

Forthcoming.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

