# TIP 419: A New Command for Binding to Tk Events
	Author:         Jeff Rogers <dvrsn@diphi.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        28-Aug-2012
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a more modern mechanism for binding callbacks to Tk's
events.

# Rationale

The Tk **bind**' command passes details about an event to a callback script
by doing a textual substitution of percent markers.  This has worked well for
years, however most recent code prefers to use command prefixes to which set
arguments are appended rather than scripts which are evaluated.  This TIP
proposes such an approach for tk event binding.

# Specification

A new command, "tkevent" is introduced with the following syntax:

 > **tkevent** _tag_ _sequence_ _cmd_

The _tag_ and _sequence_ arguments are the same as used in the **bind**
command. The _cmd_ is evaluated by appending a single argument which is a
dictionary containing the event details.  The implementation of _cmd_ can
retrieve details of the event using that dictionary.

Bindings created by **tkevent** are compatible with those created by
**bind**.  When a sequence is bound to a tag using **tkevent**, it
replaces any previous binding, and vice versa.  Appending to a binding with
"bind tag sequence \+script" may not work as expected.

The possible keys in the dict passed to the handler are:

	        serial        above         button
	        count         detail        focus
	        height        window        keycode
	        mode          override_redirect
	        place         state         time
	        width         x             y
	        character     border_width  delta
	        send_event    keysym        keysym_num
	        property      root          subwindow
	        type          window        xroot
	        yroot

These keys are intended to be be the same as the options to **event
generate** where applicable.

Not all values are legal for all event types; where a key is not legal for an
event type, it will not be present in the dictionary when the _cmd_ bound to
that event is evaluated.

# Reference Implementation

A sample implementation of these commands in pure tcl is available at
<http://wiki.tcl.tk/tkevent>

# Cross-Compatibility with Bind

Except for the "\+script" feature, **bind** and **tkevent** support
identical functionality, and either could be implemented in terms of the
other. If **bind** as a core command was dropped in favor of **tkevent**,
it could be provided as a library implementation.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

