# TIP 421: A Command for Iterating Over Arrays
	State:		Accepted
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Vote:		Done
	Post-History:
	Author:		Karl Lehenbauer <karllehenbauer@gmail.com>
	Author:		Brad Lanam <brad.lanam.comp@gmail.com>
	Author:		Donal K. Fellows <dkf@users.sf.net>
	Created:	28-Nov-2012
	Updated:	24-Oct-2017
	For:	DKF, AF, JN, SL, KBK, DGP, AK
	Against:	none
	Present:	none
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes an efficient mechanism for iterating over the contents of a
large array.

# Rationale

Tcl currently provides three main mechanisms for iterating over the contents
of an array, but none are quite perfect when dealing with a large array.

 * **array get** is simple to use \(especially with a two-variable
   **foreach**\) but requires the contents of the array to be effectively
   duplicated; even with the use of the Tcl\_Obj system for value reference
   management, this is an expensive operation.

 * **array names** \(with a simple **foreach**\) is also relatively simple
   to use, but requires producing a list whose size is the same as the number
   of elements of the array. \(This is half the size that would be required
   with **array get**, but can still be large.\)

 * **array startsearch** et al. provide a memory-efficient general iteration
   mechanism, but in a way that is rather difficult to use. It is also subject
   to significant hazards if the array is modified during iteration \(a
   particular problem for the global **env** array, as that is regenerated
   on almost any read\).

The authors propose that there be a new subcommand of **array** which allows
for efficient iteration over an array's elements.

# Proposed Change

There should be a new command, **array for**, that has this syntax:

 > **array** **for** \{_keyVar_ _valueVar_\} _arrayName_ _body_

This will iterate internally over the elements of the array called
_arrayName_ in array-iteration order \(i.e., the same as that used by the
other **array** subcommands\), setting the variable _keyVar_ to the name of
the element and the variable _valueVar_ to the content of the element before
evaluating the script _body_. The result will be the empty string \(excepting
errors, **return**, etc.\) and any contained **break** and **continue**
will have their normal interpretation as loop control operations.

Modifying the array while this command is iterating over it will make the
**array for** command terminate with an error once the current execution of
_body_ finishes.

# Implementation

Branch: `tip-421` (Code is also available
[here](https://github.com/flightaware/Tcl-bounties/issues/12) within a
comment, but that is _not_ the definitive version.)

The implementation is no faster then using **array names** or
**array get**, but uses much less memory.

# References

[Bounty #12](https://github.com/flightaware/Tcl-bounties/issues/12),
[Bounty #27](https://github.com/flightaware/Tcl-bounties/issues/27)

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

