# TIP 422: Don't Use stdarg.h/va_list in Public API
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <nijtmans@users.sf.net>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        02-Jan-2013
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Version:    9.0
	Keywords:	Tcl, API removal, varargs
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-422
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to remove all functions which use the `va_list` type from
the public API, and it describes what extensions using this should do to make
their extension portable on the mingw-w64 gcc compiler on the AMD64 platform.

# Rationale

The use of `va_list` in public API has the problem that different compilers
have a different implementation of the `va_list` structure. The implication
of this is that extensions which are compiled with mingw-w64 for the AMD64
platform, and call any of those functions will fail with a MSVC-compiled Tcl
core. The reverse fails as well. For a brief description about this problem,
see: <http://www.bailopan.net/blog/?p=30.>  See also an earlier discusion in the
Tcl Core mailing list: <http://code.activestate.com/lists/tcl-core/10807/>

# Specification

This TIP proposes to remove the following 5 functions from the public API

 * `Tcl_AppendResultVA`

 * `Tcl_AppendStringsToObjVA`

 * `Tcl_SetErrorCodeVA`

 * `Tcl_VarEvalVA`

 * `Tcl_PanicVA`

In addition, the inclusion of `<stdarg.h>` should move from `tcl.h` to `tclInt.h`,
as no public Tcl header uses it any more.

# Compatibility

Extensions using any of those functions will not compile and run in Tcl 9.0
any more. They should be rewritten to use the same functions without the VA
parameter. This can be done as follows.

Before:

	int mypanic(const char *fmt, ...) {
	    va_list ap;
	    va_start(ap, fmt);
	    Tcl_PanicVA(fmt, ap);
	    va_end(ap);
	}

After:

	int mypanic(const char *fmt, ...) {
	    va_list ap;
	    char *arg1, *arg2, *arg3, *arg4;
	    va_start(ap, fmt);
	    arg1 = va_arg(argList, char *);
	    arg2 = va_arg(argList, char *);
	    arg3 = va_arg(argList, char *);
	    arg4 = va_arg(argList, char *);
	    va_end(ap);
	    Tcl_Panic(fmt, arg1, arg2, arg3, arg4);
	}

The number of args used \(4, in this example\) should be chosen to be the
maximum number of additional parameters that is used in any `mypanic()` call.
Since this function is only ever called from the extensions itself, this can
be determined easily.

In addition, the extension must do its own inclusion of `<stdarg.h>`, as tcl.h
doesn't do that any more.

Extensions rewritten this way, will continue to compile and function with Tcl
8.x as well. I am not aware of any extension which actually calls any of those
VA functions.

For Tcl 8.7, those 5 functions will be marked "deprecated", so any extensions
still using it will get a compilation warning on compilers that support it.
For example, if `Tcl_PanicVA` is used when compiling with GCC:

	warning: 'Tcl_PanicVA' is deprecated: see TIP #422 [-Wdeprecated-declarations]
	     Tcl_PanicVA(...)
	     ^~~~~~~~~~~

And if Tcl 8.7 is compiled with the `-DTCL_NO_DEPREPATED` flag, those 5 functions will
not be exported as symbols from the DLL, and their entries in the stub table will be NULL.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is available in the [tip-422](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?r=tip-422) branch.

There is also a [tip-422-for-8](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?r=tip-422-for-8) branch, which shows the implementation
for doing the deprecation in Tcl 8.7.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

