# TIP 426: Determining the "Type" of Commands
	State:		Final
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Vote:		Done
	Post-History:	
	Author:		Donal K. Fellows <dkf@users.sf.net>
	Created:	31-Jul-2013
	Keywords:	introspection, commands, Tcl, Tk
	Vote-Results:   4/2/3 accepted
	Votes-For:      DKF, BG, JN, JD
	Votes-Against:  DGP, AK
	Votes-Present:  KBK, FV, SL
	Tcl-Branch:     dkf-command-type
-----

# Abstract

This TIP describes a mechanism for determining what "type" of command
a particular command is. This can be used as a prelude to performing
other kinds of introspection, such as using **info body**,
**namespace origin** or **interp alias**.

# Rationale

Currently, in order to find out information about an arbitrary command
you have to apply a suitable introspection command and deal with any
errors arising in order to tell that you had a command of some other
type. It was made clear to me at EuroTcl 2013 that this was inelegant,
especially since we in principle had the information available to do
something neater.

The information in question is the pointer to the implementation
function, that's stored in the C record describing the command. All
that is needed is a way to surface that information to Tcl as a new
introspection command.

# Proposed Change

This new introspection interface shall consist of one new subcommand
of **info** and a pair of new public C functions.

 > **info cmdtype** _commandName_

The new **info** subcommand is to be called **cmdtype** \(the name
is chosen so as to not conflict with abbreviations **info commands**
even though it does conflict with **info cmdcount**\) and it takes a
single argument, _commandName_, which must be the name of an
existing Tcl command. The result of this subcommand shall be a string
describing what sort of command _commandName_ is; if no other
information is available, the result shall be **native**.

NB: The Tcl implementation will not make any guarantees of the command
type for any particular command supplied by default in any
interpreter. User code should never assume that just because a command
is implemented one way in one particular version that it will continue
to be implemented that way in any future version.

## Supporting C API

The supporting public C functions shall be:

 > void **Tcl\_RegisterCommandTypeName**\(Tcl\_ObjCmdProc
   *_implementationProc_, const char \*_nameStr_\)

 > const char \* **Tcl\_GetCommandTypeName**\(Tcl\_Command _command_\)

**Tcl\_RegisterCommandTypeName** will associate a particular
implementation function, _implementationProc_, with an \(assumed
literal constant\) string, _nameStr_; if _nameStr_ is supplied as
NULL, the mapping for _implementationProc_ will be removed. The
_implementationProc_ argument must not be NULL. The use of a package
prefix within the name is _recommended_.

**Tcl\_GetCommandTypeName** shall take a command handle, _command_,
and return the registered type name string \(as previously passed to
Tcl\_RegisterCommandTypeName\) for the command implementation function
that the _command_ is using. If there is no type name registered for
the command's implementation function, the literal string **native**
will be returned instead. The result will never be NULL.

## Predefined Command Types

The following command types are guaranteed to be among the set defined
by default, but others may be done as well.

**proc**: Procedures defined by the **proc** command. Introspection
commands like **info body** may be used (without error due to the
command not being a procedure).

**alias**: Aliases defined by the **interp alias** command, which will
be able to perform introspection on it. _Inter-interpreter aliases are
not required to report themselves this way to the slave interpreter._

**ensemble**: Ensembles defined by the **namespace ensemble** command.

**import**: Commands imported by the **namespace import** command.

**object**: Object \(or class\) defined by instantiating any TclOO
class.  The introspection command **info object** may be used (without
error due to the command not being an object).

## Impact on Tk

It is anticipated that Tk widget instances will report themselves
through this mechanism as well, with a prefix to their names of
**tk::**; that prefix _should not_ be used by any other package.
Note however that not all widget types will be distinguishable; this
is part of the way that Tk is implemented.

The built-in widget creation functions _may_ declare themselves to
be of type **tk::widgetFactory**.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
