# TIP 430: Add basic ZIP archive support to Tcl
	Author:         Sean Woods <yoda@etoyoc.com>
	Author:         Donal Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
	Author:         Poor Yorick <tk.tcl.tip@pooryorick.com>
	Author:         Harald Oehlmann <oehhar@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        03-Sep-2014
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       virtual filesystem,zip,tclkit,boot,bootstrap
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This proposal will add basic support for mounting zip archive files as virtual
filesystems to the Tcl core.

# Target Tcl-Version

This TIP targets TCL Version 8.7

# Rationale

Tcl/Tk relies on the presence of a file system containing Tcl scripts for
bootstrapping the interpreter.  When dealing with code packed in a
self-contained executable, or a dynamic library, a chicken-and-egg problem
arises when developers
try to provide this bootstrap from their attached VFS with extensions like
TclVfs.  TclVfs runs in the Tcl interpreter.  The interpreter needs
_init.tcl_, which would mean that the filesystem containing _init.tcl_ is
not present until after TclVfs mounts it, yet that mount cannot happen until
after _init.tcl_ has been loaded. Bootstrap filesystem mounts require
built-in support for the filesystem that they use.

With the inclusion of Zlib in the core \(starting with 8.6, [[234]](234.md)\), all that is
required to implement a zip file system based VFS is to add a C-level VFS
implementation to decode the zip archive format. Thus: this project.

Note that we are prioritizing the zip archive format also because it is
practical to generate the files without a Tcl installation being present; it
is a format with widespread OS support. This makes it much easier to bootstrap
a build of Tcl that uses it without requiring a native build of tclsh to be
present.

# Specification

There shall be new ensemble **zipfs** added to tcl. That ensemble will
contain several commands including:

 * **zipfs canonical** _filename_

      > Returns the a string representing where _filename_ would be located
      > within zipfs.

 * **zipfs exists** _filename_

      > Returns true if a file exists in zipfs. Unlike _file exists_
      > this command is safe to run in a safe interp, because it confers
      > no access to the local file system.

 * **zipfs mount** ?_archive_? ?_mountpoint_?

     > Mounts the ZIP file _archive_ at the location given by _mountpoint_,
     > which will default to **zipfs:/_archive_** if absent. With no arguments
     > this command describes all current mounts, returning a list of pairs.

 * **zipfs root**

     > Return the root mount point for Zipfs file systems. On windows this returns **zipfs:/**.
     > On all other platforms this returns **//zipfs:/**


 * **zipfs tcl_library**

     > Search the current executable, the tcl dynamic library, and the local file system
     > for a zipfs file system containing Tcl's init.tcl file. Returns null if none was found.

 * **zipfs unmount** _archive_

     > Unmounts the ZIP file _archive_, which must have been previously mounted.

Outside of a save interpreter, the following additional commands will be available:

 * **zipfs lmkimg** _outfile_ _inlist_ ?strip? ?_password_? ?infile?

     > Generate a zip archive (_outfile_) from a list of files (_inlist_),
     > as a self extracting executable appended to a bare executable (_infile_).
     >
     > If _strip_ is given, that string will be removed from the front of all files
     > before generating their names within the archive.
     >
     > If _password_ is given, the file will be encrypted with that passphrase

 * **zipfs lmkzip** _outfile_ _inlist_ ?strip? ?_password_?

     > Generate a zip archive (_outfile_) from a list of files (_inlist_).

 * **zipfs mkzip** _outfile_ _indir_ ?strip? ?_password_?

     > Generate a zip archive (_outfile_) from the contents of a directory (_indir_)

 * **zipfs mkimg** _outfile_ _indir_ ?strip? ?_password_? ?infile?

     > Generate a zip archive (_outfile_) from the contents of a directory (_indir_),
     > as a self extracting executable appended to a bare executable (_infile_).


## VFS Mount Point

On virtually all platforms tcl supports (Unix, Windows) ZipFs will mount all archives
under *//zipfs:/*. Some operating systems (past or future) may have a special meaning
for this style path. To that end, it may be changed to address the needs of the
specific environment. Which root is being used for
the current platform can be accessed via a call to **zipfs root**. For the remainder
of this document, references to *//zipfs:/* are also intended to referred to whatever
the prefix designated by **ZIPFS\_ROOT** actually is.

Volumes may be mounted at any point under
**ZIPFS\_ROOT**, and if a mount point does not start with **ZIPFS\_ROOT** the path will be
considered relative to **ZIPFS\_ROOT**. This conventions avoids some confusing interactions
between **file normalize** and **glob** that differ between Windows and Unix and
make building global paths either hop volumes or interact with the native file system.

Having a fixed mount point breaks from the tradition of mounting volumes under /
or **info nameofexecutable** that other zipfs implementations use. However, if
a kit builder wishes to retain that capability, all that is required is to
load their own zipfs implementation using the conventional shims provided for kit building.
The function names for the core implementation have been modified to not conflict with
zipfs implementations that are out in the wild.

## Generating Task Executables Tclsh/Wish

If tclsh/wish detect that the executable has a zip archive attached, the executable will be
mounted as **ZIPFS\_ROOT**_/app_. If **ZIPFS\_ROOT**_/app/main.tcl_ exists, that file is marked
set the shell's startup script. If **ZIPFS\_ROOT**_/app/tcl\_library/_ exists, it will be
searched for init.tcl.

The way to produce an executable will be as follows (Assuming the source for the application
is at ~/myapp/src:

From Tcl:

    > zipfs mkimg ~/bin/myapp.exe ~/myapp/src ~/myapp/src ~/bin/tclsh87.exe

From Unix:

    > cd ~/myapp/src
    > zip -r ~/myapp.zip .
    > cd ..
    > cp ~/bin/tclsh87.exe myapp.exe
    > cat myapp.zip >> myapp.exe

## First argument handling for Tclsh/Wish

If the first argument to Tclsh or Wish is detected to be a zipfile, that file will be
mounted as **ZIPFS\_ROOT*_/app_. If **ZIPFS\_ROOT**_/app/main.tcl_ exists, that file is marked
set the shell's startup script. If **ZIPFS\_ROOT**_/app/tcl\_library_ exists, it will be
searched for init.tcl.

## New Tclsh features for TEA

To assist in packaging extensions, **tclsh** will take on a new command _install_. If
_install_ is the first argument, set subsequent arguments are passed to a new file
in library **install.tcl**.

**tclsh install** with no arguments is designed to return immediately with a normal return code,
thus making it easy to test if a tclsh is tip430 Savvy but running in autoconf:

    > AS_IF([$TCLSH_PROG install],[
    >  ZIP_PROG=${TCLSH_PROG}
    >  ZIP_PROG_OPTIONS="install mkzip"
    >  ZIP_PROG_VFSSEARCH="."
    >  AC_MSG_RESULT([Can use Native Tclsh for Zip encoding])
    > ])

This tip only defines 2 function for install:

 * **tclsh install mkzip**.

    > This command is a passthrough to the **zipfs mkzip** command, and allows
    > tclsh to operate as zip encoder from make.

 * **tclsh install mkimg**.

    > This command is a passthrough to the **zipfs mkimg** command, and allows
    > tclsh to operate as zip encoder from make.

 * **tclsh install copyDir** _source_ _destination_

    > This command will recursively copy the file structure of _source_
    > to _destination_

 * **tclsh install installDir** _source_ _destination_

    > This command will recursively copy the file structure of _source_
    > to _destination_, deleting _destination_ if it already exists, and
    > marking all files copies as read-only.

 * **tclsh install pkgindex_path** _path_ ?_path_...?

    > Index all of the paths specified and generate a script that can
    > be sourced to feed all of the __package ifneeded__ statements
    > to an interpreter in one shot. Useful for indexing VFS file systems
    >
    > example:

    tclsh install copyDir ~/myapp/src myapp.vfs
    tclsh install pkgindex_path myapp.vfs > myapp.vfs/pkgIndex.tcl

## Package loading

Calls to **tcl_findLibrary** will now search through loaded packages to see if
the dynamic library for the package in question has an attached zip file system. If that
file system exists, it is mounted to **ZIPFS\_ROOT**_/lib/_**PGKNAME**, and that mount
point is added to the list of directories to search.

# Implementation

This work is largely adapted Richard Hipp's work on Tcl As One Big Executable \(TOBE\).
The concept has been modernized, somewhat, as well as heavily influenced by improvements
made to it through the FreeWrap and Androwish projects. That implementation consists of one C file
\(_tclZipvfs.c_\).  I have also prepared a set of kit-like behaviors for the
core to express when tclAppInit.c is not compiled with a **TCL\_LOCAL\_MAIN\_HOOK**
defined. Those behaviors reside in the *TclZipfs_AppHook\(\)* function.

This work is checked in as the "_core\_zip\_vfs_" branch on both Tcl and Tk.


## Modifications to auto.tcl

*auto.tcl* now has rules for scanning DLLs for zip file systems.

## Modifications to minizip.c

*minizip* has been modified to be able to handle recursive directory arguments.

## Modifications to tclAppInit.c

*tclAppInit.c* will now call *TclZipfs_AppHook\(\)* if no **TCL\_LOCAL\_MAIN\_HOOK** was defined.


## Modifications to tclBasic.c

*tclBasic.c* will contain a call to *TclZipfs_Init\(\) which will initialize the
portions of C needed to implement zipfs as well as inject the zipfs command into the
interpreter.

## Modifications to tclFileName.c

*tclFileName.c* has a minor patch to exclude the prefix **//** from local file searches.

## New C File tclZipFS.c

This file is a self-contained implementation in C of a zip based VFS. It includes all
functions needed for implementing zipfs.

## Modifications to tclIOUtil.c

*tclIOUtil.c* has a minor patch to exclude UNC style paths that contain a colon \(:\) in
the server field from being resolved by the operating system. (Which by standard is
not allowed anyway.) This allows VFS file systems to use **//**_FSTYPE_**:** namespace
with impunity.

## Modifications to the Tcl build system

Tcl will now attempt to find a zip encoder in the environment. If a tip430 savvy tclsh is
discovered, that shell will be used. Failing that, the system will search for an executable
named **zip**. Failing that, tcl will build it's own zip encoder.

When it cannot locate a zip encoded in the environment, Tcl will now build a copy of the
**minizip** program, whose source is currently distributed
in */compat/zlib/contrib/minizip*. The *tcl.m4* macro now detects if the compiler used
can produce native native executables, and in cases where it cannot, will search for
a C compiler that can, an substitute that value into the Makefile as **HOST_CC**. The C compiler
will generate a native executable **minizip** which will be compiled in the same directory
as tcl, and be used for all archive creation.

## New build product libtcl.zip

A new build target **libtcl\_**_MAJOR\_MINOR\_PATCHLEVEL_**.zip** is
created from the **/library** directory in the tcl sources. For static library installs,
this archive is copied to the tcl standard install location. For shared library builds this
archive is appended to the dynamic library.

## Modifications to the /library file system

To reduce the complexity of building archives, *init.tcl* has been modified to look for
the presence of an adjacent file *pkgIndex.tcl*. That file contains all of the **package ifneeded**
calls to direct the core to find the core distributed packages relative to location of
**tcl_library**. Unlike other **pkgIndex.tcl** files, this file must be manually maintained
and kept up to date as package names and versions change, are added, or removed.

## Modifications to the tclConfig.sh and TEA

A new field **TCL_ZIP_FILE** will indicate the name of the zip archive generated by the build
system. If this field is present and the value is non-blank, extensions (for instance Tk)
can use this to infer the core was built with ZipFs support.

TEA extensions which detect a non-blank value for **TCL_ZIP_FILE** will generate a value
**TCL_ZIPFS_SUPPORT=1** when compiling as a shared library, and **TCL_ZIPFS_SUPPORT=2**
when compiling as a static library.

## Modifications to Tk

Tk will scan tclConfig.sh, and if it detects a non-blank value for **TCL_ZIP_FILE**, it
will make a call to *TclZipfs_AppHook\(\)* if no **TK\_LOCAL\_MAIN\_HOOK** was defined.

# C API

* **int TclZipfs_AppHook\(int \*argc, char \*\*\*argv\);**

1. If the current executable has an attached zip file system, mount that to **ZIPFS\_ROOT**/app.
2. If the file **ZIPFS\_ROOT**_/app/main.tcl_ exists, register that file as the process startup script.
3. If the file **ZIPFS\_ROOT**_/app/tcl\_library/init.tcl_ exists, register **ZIPFS\_ROOT**_/app/tcl\_library/init.tcl_ as **tcl\_library**
4. If the file **ZIPFS\_ROOT**_/app/tk\_library/init.tcl_ exists, register **ZIPFS\_ROOT**_/app/tk\_library/init.tcl* as **tk\_library**
5. If **tcl\_library** was not set, the function will then scan the local environment for a
zipfs file system attached to either the tcl dynamic library or an archive named
*libtcl\_MAJOR\_MINOR\_PATCHLEVEL.zip*. That file can either be in the present working directory
or in the standard system install location for Tcl.

* **int TclZipfs_Mount\(Tcl\_Interp \*interp, const char \*zipname, const char \*mntpt, const char \*passwd\);**

    > Mounts a zip file _zipname_ to the mount point _mntpt_. If _passwd_ is
    > non-null, that string is used as the password to decrypt the contents.
    > _mntpnt_ will always be relative to **zipfs:**

* **int TclZipfs_Unmount\(Tcl\_Interp \*interp, const char \*zipname\);**

    > Unmount the file system created by a prior call to **TclZipfs_Mount\(\)**

# Creating a wrapped executable

With this tip, producing a wrapped executable is now a matter of:

    mkdir myvfs.vfs
    cd myvfs.vfs
    echo "puts {hello world}" > main.tcl
    zip -r ../hello.zip .
    cd ..
    cp tclsh8.7 hello
    cat hello.zip >> hello
    ./hello
    > hello world

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

