# TIP 431: Add 'tempdir' Subcommand to 'file'
	Author:         Kevin Pasko <kevin.a.pasko@gmail.com>
	State:          Accepted
	Type:           Project
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        10-Sep-2014
	Keywords:       Tcl, directory, file
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-431
	Votes-For:      DKF, FV, KBK, JN, SL
	Votes-Against:  none
	Votes-Present:  none
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes adding a new **tempdir** subcommand to the **file**
command, simplifying the effort required in creating uniquely named temporary
directories at the scripting level.

# Rationale

Due to the non-atomic nature of the **file mkdir** command it is currently
impossible to create uniquely named temporary directories at the script level
without the possibility of race conditions.

# Specification

The **file tempdir** command shall implement the functionality of the POSIX
standard mkdtemp\(\) function. With no arguments **file tempdir** shall create
a uniquely named temporary directory in the native operating system's
temporary directory, with naming convention "<b>tcl\_</b><i>XXXXXX</i>" where each
_X_ is a randomly selected character \(following the **file tempfile**
naming convention\). Successful completion of **file tempdir** shall return
the absolute path of the created directory, otherwise an error shall be
thrown. (The number of _X_ characters shall be system specific.)

**file tempdir** shall have an optional argument, _template_, to modify
the created directory's path and name. The _template_ shall be decomposed
into \(up to\) two parts: the directory's path and rootname. If either part is
absent, relevant defaults \(e.g., according to the native operating system\)
shall be used. The entire temporary name shall then be formed from the path,
the root, and a generated unique string of \(typically\) six
characters (eight on Windows, due to case-insensitive filesystems
reducing the size of portable random alphabet). If
the directory part of the _template_ is supplied, it should refer to a
directory on the native filesystem.

The command syntax should be defined as:

 > **file tempdir** ?_template_?

# Considerations

 * The subcommand **tempdir** could be a candidate, later, for returning the
   native file system's temporary directory. Naming the subcommand something
   else such as **mktempdir** is another option, though strays from the **file
   tempfile** naming convention.

 * For future extensibility the _template_ argument to **file tempdir**
   \(since it is optional\) could be specified in the key / value format,
   **-template** _template_, changing the command syntax to:

	 > **file tempdir** ?_options..._?

# Reference Implementation

An example of temporary directory creation has already been developed in the
Tcl core, at the C level, within the Windows-specific layers of the
**load** command. The principal work remaining is to expose this via a Tcl
command and building equivalent functionality on other platforms.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

