# TIP 433: Add %M binding substitution
	Author:		Joe Mistachkin <joe@mistachkin.com>
	Author:		Brian Griffin <brian_griffin@mentor.com>
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sf.net>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        25-Feb-2015
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.6.4
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes one new binding substitution, **%M**, to access
the number of script-based binding patterns matched so far for the event.

# Background

In a presentation at the 2012 Tcl Conference
\(<http://www.tclcommunityassociation.org/wub/proceedings/Proceedings-2012/RonWold/Customizable-Keyboard-Shortcuts.pdf\),> Ron Wold pointed out that
coding global catch-all scripts bound to the same event in many widgets
is complicated because Tk's **bind** machinery allows any bind script to
use **break** to prevent later bind scripts from evaluating.  Among
a known set of bind scripts, this is a useful technique, but it interferes
with the non-coordinated introduction of additional bind scripts
on the same event.

An alternative strategy is to avoid any bind script using **break**, but
to give the latter scripts the means to detect when an earlier
script has run so it can defer its own operations.  That motivates
the introduction of a means by which a bind script can discover something
about the history of other bind script evaluations on the same event.

# Specification

Add to the set of substitutions made in scripts passed to **bind**
the new one, **%M**.  When the substring **%M** appears in a binding
script, it will be replaced with a count of the number of binding
script evaluations that have already been performed in the handling
of the current event.

# Simple Example

The script...

	   pack [entry .e]
	   bind all <Key> {set z %M}
	   bind Entry <Key> {set y %M}
	   bind .e <Key> {set x %M}
	   event generate .e <Key-a>
	   list $x $y $z

will produce the result:

	   0 1 2

# Use Case Example

One of the default bind scripts in Tk is

	 event add <<NextWindow>> <Tab>
	 bind all <<NextWindow>> {tk::TabToWindow [tk_focusNext %W]}

which permits a **<Tab>** anywhere in Tk to shift the focus.

Some widgets have their own uses for **<Tab>**, though, notably

	 bind Text <Tab> {
	     if {[%W cget -state] eq "normal"} {
	         tk::TextInsert %W \t
	         focus %W
	         break
	     }
	 }

where a text widget in normal state accepts **Tab**s as entered
text like any other keypresses.  The **break** in this script serves
to prevent the focus shift that would otherwise take place.
Since the same Tk developers coded both bind scripts, the global
knowledge can make the system work as a whole.

However, a third party facility trying to join the party has
difficulty.  Consider a simple key logging facility,

	 bind all <Key> {log_key %W %k %s %x %y %X %Y %A}

This will fail to log **Tab**s typed in a Text due to the **break** noted
above.

With the **%M** binding proposed here, an alternative set of
bind scripts is possible.

	 bind all <<NextWindow>> {if {%M==0} {tk::TabToWindow [tk_focusNext %W]}}

	 bind Text <Tab> {
	     if {[%W cget -state] eq "normal"} {
	         tk::TextInsert %W \t
	         focus %W
	     }
	 }

In fact with the revised script bound to **all** it may be that
the script bound to **<Tab>** is no longer needed at all and the
general default binding

	 bind Text <KeyPress> {tk::TextInsert %W %A}

is sufficient.

With this alternative in place the third-party keylogger would work.

# Compatibility

Any **%M** in an existing bind script will now stop reproducing
itself literally, and will result in the new substitution.  This
has the potential to cause trouble with any bind scripts that
themselves make use of **clock scan** or **clock format** or 
any other command that invites the use of the literal string **%M**.
Dealing with such a situation is not difficult, but it is still
a potential incompatibility.

# Prototype

This feature is already implemented and committed to both the
core-8-5-branch and the trunk, and is poised to be released
as part of Tk 8.5.18 and Tk 8.6.4.  Any objections to that
should be raised in TIP discussion and voting.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

