# TIP 434: Specify Event Sources for 'vwait'
	Author:		Jos Decoster <jos.decoster@gmail.com>
	State:		Withdrawn
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.6
	Vote:	Pending
	Created:	26-Feb-2015
	Post-History:	
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to extend the **vwait** Tcl command so the event sources can
be specified, as is possible with the **Tcl\_DoOneEvent** C command.

# Rationale

In some situations it can be required not to wait for specific event sources or
to wait for specific events sources only. You might want the program to only
react on timer events, and not on file or window events. You can write your own
version of the **Tcl\_VwaitObjCmd** command in C, and call **Tcl\_DoOneEvent**
with the flags you need. Making it possible to specify the event sources,
i.e. the arguments for the call to **Tcl\_DoOneEvent** within
**Tcl\_VwaitObjCmd**, from the Tcl **vwait** command would make this
functionality available from the Tcl lebvel.

# Specification

This document proposes to add optional arguments to the **vwait** command. If
these arguments are not specified, the current event source 
**TCL\_ALL\_EVENTS** will be used. If the optinal arguments are specified, they
are the event sources to be passed to **Tcl\_DoOneEvent** within
**Tcl\_VwaitObjCmd**. The flags set with the optinal arguments will be
or-ed. Possible flags are corresponding to the flags for the
**Tcl\_DoOneEvent** command:

   * **-all** \(default\) - process all events

   * **-file**          - process file events

   * **-idle**          - process idle events

   * **-timer**         - process timer events

   * **-window**        - process window system events

Example: wait until variable **a** is written and only allow timer events to
be processed:

	 vwait a -timer

# Alternatives

A possible alternative is to add support for a **-events <event\_list>**
argument.

A **-dont\_wait** argument is not added, a call to **update** will have the
same effect.

# Compatibility

No incompatibilities are introduced.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is available.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

