# TIP 441: Add -justify Configuration Option to the listbox Widget
	Author:         François Vogel <fvogelnew1@users.sf.net>
	Author:         François Vogel <fvogelnew1@free.fr>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        18-Jan-2016
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tk,listbox
	Tcl-Version:    8.6.5
-----

# Abstract

Despite the **listbox** widget already having numerous configuration
options, some users need more refinements and have requested the possibility
to control the justification of the text displayed in the items of the
listbox. This TIP proposes to add this option.

# Rationale

Currently the **listbox** widget always aligns its items leftwards. Some
users miss a configuration options allowing to justify items in the
**listbox** widget. These RFE include:

  * RFE 454303, <https://core.tcl.tk/tk/tktview/454303> 

  * RFE 3f456a5bb9, <https://core.tcl.tk/tk/tktview/3f456a5bb9> 

# Proposed Change

It is proposed to add the **-justify** configuration option to the Tk
**listbox** widget.

Possible values are as already documented in the **options** manual page
\(i.e., **left**, **center**, or **right**\), and translate internally
into standard _Tk\_Justify_ values, i.e., TK\_JUSTIFY\_LEFT, TK\_JUSTIFY\_CENTER,
and TK\_JUSTIFY\_RIGHT, respectively.

Default value is **left** on all platforms, for backwards compatibility reasons.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is available in branch tip-441 of the fossil
repository.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

