# TIP 443: More Tag Configuration Options for the Text Widget
	Author:         François Vogel <fvogelnew1@free.fr>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        09-Feb-2016
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tk
	Tcl-Version:    8.6.6
-----

# Abstract

Despite the **text** widget already has numerous configuration options, some
users need more refinements and have requested new tag configuration options.
This TIP proposes to add these options, when deemed relevant.

# Rationale

Several users have reported they miss different tag configuration options in
the **text** widget, stating they cannot achieve the rendering they target.
Such RFE include:

 * RFE 1759972 <https://core.tcl.tk/tk/tktview/1759972> , with Patch
   3469780 <https://core.tcl.tk/tk/tktview/3469780> 

 * RFE 220889 <https://core.tcl.tk/tk/tktview/220889> 

 * RFE 1754048 <https://core.tcl.tk/tk/tktview/1754048> 

# Proposed Change

It is proposed to add the following tag configuration options to the Tk
**text** widget:

**-selectbackground** _color_:

 > Specifies the background color to use
   when displaying selected items. It may have any of the forms accepted by
   **Tk\_GetColor**. If _color_ has not been specified, or if it is
   specified as an empty string, then the color specified by the
   **-background** tag option is used.

 > Note regarding the particular case of the "sel"
 tag: Currently, the "sel" tag **-background** tag option is mirrored with
 the **-selectbackground** text widget option. This makes sense. It does not
 make real sense to have **-selectbackground** applied to the "sel" tag \(it
 is more intuitive to use **-background** for the "sel" tag\). However, if the
 "sel" tag receives non-empty **-selectbackground**, then this tag option
 prevails on the **-background** tag option for mirroring, i.e. the
 **-selectbackground** tag option is mirrored with the
 **-selectbackground** widget option.

**-selectforeground** _color_:

 > Specifies the foreground color to use
   when displaying selected items. It may have any of the forms accepted by
   **Tk\_GetColor**. If _color_ has not been specified, or if it is
   specified as an empty string, then the color specified by the
   **-foreground** tag option is used.

 > Note regarding the particular case of the "sel"
 tag: same principle as above for **-selectbackground**.

**-underlinefg** _color_:

 > Specifies the color to use when displaying
   the underline. It may have any of the forms accepted by **Tk\_GetColor**.
   If _color_ has not been specified, or if it is specified as an empty
   string, then the color specified by the **-foreground** tag option is
   used \(if there is one, otherwise the the color specified by the
   **-foreground** widget option is used\).

**-overstrikefg** _color_:

 > Specifies the color to use when
   displaying the overstrike. It may have any of the forms accepted by
   **Tk\_GetColor**. If _color_ has not been specified, or if it is
   specified as an empty string, then the color specified by the
   **-foreground** tag option is used \(if there is one, otherwise the
   color specified by the **-foreground** widget option is used\).

**-lmargincolor** _color_:

 > _Color_ specifies the background color
   to use in regions that do not contain characters because they are
   indented by **-lmargin1** or **-lmargin2**. It may have any of the
   forms accepted by **Tk\_GetColor**. If _color_ has not been specified,
   or if it is specified as an empty string, then the color specified by the
   **-background** widget option is used.

**-rmargincolor** _color_:

 > _Color_ specifies the background color
   to use in regions that do not contain characters because they are
   indented by **-rmargin**. It may have any of the forms accepted by
   **Tk\_GetColor**. If _color_ has not been specified, or if it is
   specified as an empty string, then the color specified by the
   **-background** widget option is used.

# Rejected additional tag configuration options

RFE 1759972 <https://core.tcl.tk/tk/tktview/1759972>  requested stippling
\(**-selectbgstipple**, **-selectfgstipple**\) for selected text. Also RFE 1754048 <https://core.tcl.tk/tk/tktview/1754048>  requested stippling in left and right margins of the text widget \(**-lmargin1stipple**, **-lmargin2stipple**, **rmarginstipple**\).

Any new stippling options was rejected during the discussion about this
TIP. Reasons were as follows:

 * "Stippling and anything related to Tk Bitmaps should be considered
   obsolete. Their use should be phased out, not expanded. \(Bitmaps have
   very limited support in Tk, and stippling is virtually never used in
   modern user interfaces. In fact, AFAIK current graphics stacks --
   cairo, Quartz, Direct3D, &c -- don't even support this operation."

 * "Stippling is something that is an artefact of a prior time, and it
   looks pretty bad now. These days, a way to specify an alpha value for
   the tag would be far more relevant, since then it would end up with a
   blend of the text foreground and background."

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is available in branch tip-443 of the fossil
repository.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

