# TIP 445: Tcl_ObjType Utility Routines
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Accepted
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        18-Mar-2016
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-445
	Vote-Summary:   Accepted 4/0/3
	Votes-For:      DKF, KBK, JN, DGP
	Votes-Against:  none
	Votes-Present:  BG, FV, SL
-----

# Abstract

Proposes additional public routines useful for extensions that implement
custom `Tcl_ObjType`s.

# Background

When an extension creates a custom **Tcl\_ObjType** it needs to operate on the fields of the **Tcl\_Obj** and the **Tcl\_ObjType** structs.

Almost all of these operations have been nicely encapsulated in utility routines, so for example, an extension calls **Tcl\_GetString** to make sure a value is set for _objPtr->bytes_, rather than worrying about the backing details of calling the routine _objPtr->typePtr->updateStringProc_ \(if present\) for itself.  Likewise **Tcl\_DuplicateObj** routes processing to type-specific routines as needed.

There are gaps in this interface.  Most glaring is the lack of any way to call the _freeIntRepProc_ of an incumbent type other than directly through the _typePtr_ field.  Another missing bit is an encapsulated way to set the string rep without direct manipulation of the _bytes_ and _length_ fields.  Within Tcl itself, there are internal utility macros **TclFreeIntRep** and **TclInitStringRep** for these tasks, but extensions have nothing.

Besides convenience, utility routines such as these improve chances for correctness, since they bring constraints into one place instead of many places.  For example, the requirement that when _objPtr->typePtr_ is not NULL, it must be paired with an appropriate _objPtr->internalRep_.  The **TclFreeIntRep** macro has a history of fixing such bugs.  A corresponding routine will offer the same benefit to extensions.

# Proposal

Add to Tcl's stub table of public C routines a new routine

 > void **Tcl\_FreeIntRep**\(Tcl\_Obj\* _objPtr_\)

that performs precisely the same task as the existing internal
macro **TclFreeIntRep**.

Add to Tcl's stub table of public C routines a new routine 

 > char \* **Tcl\_InitStringRep**\(Tcl\_Obj\* _objPtr_, const char\* _bytes_, unsigned int _numBytes_\)

that performs the function of the existing internal
macro **TclInitStringRep**, but is extended to return a pointer to the
string rep, and to accept NULL as a value for _bytes_.  When _bytes_ is
NULL and _objPtr_ has no string rep, an uninitialzed buffer
of _numBytes_ bytes is created for filling by the caller.
When _bytes_ is NULL and _objPtr_ has a string rep, the string rep will
be truncated to a length of _numBytes_ bytes.  When _numBytes_ is 
greater than zero, and the returned pointer is NULL, that indicates a
failure to allocate memory for the string representation.  The caller
may then choose whether to raise an error or panic.

Add to Tcl's stub table of public C routines a new routine 

 > int **Tcl\_HasStringRep**\(Tcl\_Obj\* _objPtr_\)

that returns a boolean indicating whether or not a string rep
is currently stored in _objPtr_.  This is used when the caller
wants to act on _objPtr_ differently depending on whether or
not it is a _pure_ value.  Typically this only makes sense in
an extension if it is already known that _objPtr_ possesses
an internal type that is managed by the extension.

Define a new public type

 > typedef union **Tcl\_ObjIntRep** \{...\} **Tcl\_ObjIntRep**

where the contents are exactly the existing contents of the union
in the _internalRep_ field of the **Tcl\_Obj** struct.  This definition
permits us to pass internal representations and pointers to them as
arguments and results in public routines.

Add to Tcl's stub table of public C routines a new routine 

 > void **Tcl\_StoreIntRep**\(Tcl\_Obj\* _objPtr_, const Tcl\_ObjType\* _typePtr_, const Tcl\_ObjIntRep\* _irPtr_\)

which stores in _objPtr_ a copy of the internal representation pointed
to by _irPtr_ and sets its type to _typePtr_.  When _irPtr_ is NULL,
this leaves _objPtr_ without a representation for type _typePtr_.

Add to Tcl's stub table of public C routines a new routine 

 > Tcl\_ObjIntRep\* **Tcl\_FetchIntRep**\(Tcl\_Obj\* _objPtr_, const Tcl\_ObjType\* _typePtr_\)

which returns a pointer to the internal representation stored
in _objPtr_ that matches the requested type _typePtr_.  If no such
internal representation is in _objPtr_, return NULL.

# Compatibility

These are new routines, so they have no compatibility concerns in the sense of cause trouble for existing working code.

They do help set up an improved compatibility scenario for the future however.  Extensions that use these new routines to stop directly referring to the fields of the **Tcl\_Obj** and **Tcl\_ObjType** structs are prepared to support a source-compatible migration to a Tcl 9 that might then be free to make revisions to those structs.

# Implementation

Taking shape on the tip-445 branch.

# Rejected Alternatives

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

