# TIP 446: Introspect Undo/Redo Stack Depths
	Author:         François Vogel <fvogelnew1@free.fr>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        05-Apr-2016
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tk
	Tcl-Version:    8.6.6
	Tk-Branch:      tip-446
-----

# Abstract

Tk features a generic undo/redo mechanism \(see [[104]](104.md)\). This is used in
practice by the **text** widget, within the **edit** command. The present
TIP proposes to add two new subcommands to the **edit** command allowing the
user to know whether undo and redo is possible for a **text** widget.

# Rationale

The undo/redo feature of Tk is handy and works very well. In modern GUIs,
there is usually a button in a menubar to call the "Undo" command, and
likewise for "Redo". It is good practice to enhance the user experience by
greying out or otherwise changing the button aspect when there is nothing to
undo \(or redo\). This cannot be achieved currently with the curent Tk
implementation because there is no way to know whether the undo and redo
stacks are empty or not.

This feature was requested for the text widget in RFE 1273358
<https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/tktview/1273358> 

# Proposed Change

It is proposed to add the following subcommands to the **text** widget's
**edit** command:

**canundo**:

 > Returns a boolean true if undo is possible, i.e. when the undo stack is
   not empty. Otherwise returns false.

**canredo**:

 > Returns a boolean true if redo is possible, i.e. when the undo stack is
   not empty. Otherwise returns false.

When the **-undo** option of the text widget is false both subcommands return
false since indeed no undo nor redo action is possible in this case. The undo/redo
stacks are however not cleared, so that when -undo becomes eventually true again
the two new subcommands will return their value in accordance with the contents
of the stacks \(this is current behavior of the undo/redo feature - the TIP does
not intend to change this\).

This new capability will be implemented in the generic code for undo
\(_generic/tkUndo.c_\), so that any client of the generic undo/redo mechanism
can make use of it. Currently, only the **text** widget is concerned since
no other Tk widget is featuring undo/redo.

Besides the two new subcommands, it is also proposed to add a new virtual event
**<<UndoStack>>**, that will trigger each time the undo or redo stack becomes
empty or unempty. When this condition is met, the event will trigger once for
each peer widget.

Despite this is a new feature, this TIP targets Tk 8.6.6 since no change of
any existing behavior is proposed: only new, additonal, features are proposed.
It is therefore believed there is no risk regarding backwards compatibility
in the 8.6.x series.

# Example

	  package require Tk
	
	  pack [text .t -undo false -autoseparators false]
	
	  set nbUS 0
	  bind .t <<UndoStack>> {incr nbUS}
	
	  .t edit canundo    ; # 0
	  .t edit canredo    ; # 0
	
	  .t configure -undo true
	
	  .t edit canundo    ; # 0
	  .t edit canredo    ; # 0
	
	  .t insert end "ABC\n"
	  .t edit separator
	  .t insert end "DEF\n"
	  .t insert end "DEF again\n"
	  .t edit separator
	
	  .t edit canundo    ; # 1
	  .t edit canredo    ; # 0
	
	  .t edit undo
	
	  .t edit canundo    ; # 1
	  .t edit canredo    ; # 1
	
	  # A quick interactive testing environment...:
	  
	  pack [label .l]
	  
	  proc showit {} {
	    global nbUS
	    .l configure -text "Can undo: [.t edit canundo]\t\t\t \
	                        Can redo: [.t edit canredo]\t\t\t \
	                        <<UndoStack>> triggered: $nbUS"
	    after 200 showit
	  }
	  showit
	  
	  proc toggleautosep {} {
	    global autosepset
	    set autosepset [.t cget -autoseparators]
	    if {$autosepset} {
	      .t configure -autoseparators false
	    } else {
	      .t configure -autoseparators true
	    }
	    set autosepset [.t cget -autoseparators]
	  }
	  proc toggleundo {} {
	    global undoset
	    set undoset [.t cget -undo]
	    if {$undoset} {
	      .t configure -undo false
	    } else {
	      .t configure -undo true
	    }
	    set undoset [.t cget -undo]
	  }
	  button .b1 -text "Insert separator" -command {.t edit separator}
	  button .b2 -text "Undo" -command {.t edit undo}
	  button .b3 -text "Redo" -command {.t edit redo}
	  button .b32 -text "Reset" -command {.t edit reset}
	  checkbutton .b4 -text "-autoseparators" -command toggleautosep -variable autosepset
	  checkbutton .b5 -text "-undo" -command toggleundo -variable undoset ; .b5 select
	  
	  pack .b1 .b2 .b3 .b32 .b4 .b5 -side left -padx 10

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is available in branch tip-446 of the fossil
repository. Credits for this implementation largely go to Neil Hodgson, the author of TkTextPlus \(for canundo/canredo\) and to Koen Danckaert \(for <<UndoStack>>\).

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

