# TIP 448: Update Tcl_SetNotifier to Reinitialize Event Loop
	Author:		Jeff Rogers <dvrsn@diphi.com>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Vote:		Pending
	Created:	24-May-2016
	Post-History:
	Keywords: Tcl, C API
-----

# Abstract

Tcl\_SetNotifier cannot be used in its current state to replace a notifier than
has been initialized because pointers to the old initialized value are kept in
the interp's private data.  This TIP proposes a way to change that.

# Background

The **Tcl\_SetNotifier** API was introduced to allow replacement of the
built-in notifier; it works by setting hooks for various notifier functions
that are called in place of the builtin functions.

It was expected that this function would only be called before the Tcl library
had been initialized and any state had been set up; however this prevents it
from being usable from a module loaded by a running interpreter.

This TIP proposes changing the behavior of this API to, in addition to setting
the function hooks will shut down a running notifier and restart the notifier
if it has been running previously.  This is the minimum change necessary to
allow a new notifier to be loaded from within a running interpreter.

It is probably not always possible to stop a running notifier, especially if
event sources have been created.  It is not necessarily easy to detect such
failure; the proposed implementation doesn't even try.  And there is no way to
report such failure if it was detected.  As such, this remains a somewhat
dangerous interface to use.

With this change in place, it will be possible to load a new notifier
implementation \(e.g., a _poll\(\)_ or _libevent_ based one\) from a Tcl
program, provided it is the very first thing done.  An implementation of a
poll-based notifier that requires the functionality in this TIP can be found
at <http://fossil.etoyoc.com/sandbox/tcllib/artifact/ad30080cdee762a3>

# Description

Change the implementation of **Tcl\_SetNotifier** to check if a notifier is
currently running; if it is, the current notifier will be finalized before the
new hooks are swapped in, and afterwards the notifier will be re-initialized.
If the notifier is not already initialized, there is no change to
functionality.

# Implementation

A patch implementing the proposed change can be found at
<http://fossil.etoyoc.com/sandbox/tcllib/artifact/b2b272a285811272>

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

