# TIP 45: Empty index lists for [lindex] and [lset]
	Author:         Kevin Kenny <kennykb@acm.org>
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        18-Jul-2001
	Post-History:   
	Discussions-To: news:comp.lang.tcl,mailto:kennykb@acm.org
	Keywords:       lindex,lset,multiple arguments,sublists
	Tcl-Version:    8.4b1
-----

# Abstract

TIP's \#22 and \#33 contain an oversight in specifying the behavior
of the multi-argument forms of _lset_ and _lindex_ when an empty
index list is specified.  The intended behavior is that an empty list
of indices designates the entire list.

# Rationale

In the discussion of [[33]](33.md)
\(<http://www.geocrawler.com/archives/3/7375/2001/5/0/5784409/> \), Jim
Ingham pointed out that the list of indices presented to the
multi-argument forms of _lindex_ and _lset_ is analogous to a
database cursor.  This cursor is conceptually navigating a tree
structure; the command:

	  lindex $list {1 2 3}

means, "extract the sublist at index 1 in $list, the sublist at
index 2 in that list, and the element at index 3 in that list".

When implementing this functionality, the author of this TIP
realized that [[22]](22.md) and [[33]](33.md) provide no way to
address the root of the tree -- the entire list being manipulated.
An empty list of indices is a convenient means of specifying the root.

# Specification

 1. The specification of _lindex_ in [[22]](22.md) shall be amended so that
    the forms:

		  lindex list

	 >  and

		  lindex list {}

	 >  will return the value of the entire list.  The _list_ parameter
    is not required to be a well-formed Tcl list when
    this form is used.

 1. The specification of _lset_ in [[33]](33.md) shall be amended so that
    the forms:

		  lset var value

	 >  and

		  lset var {} value

	 >  will simply store the supplied value into the variable named _var_.
    Neither the old nor the new value of _var_ is required to be
    a well-formed Tcl list when this form is used.  The return value of
    the operation, as with all other uses of _lset_, is the
    new value of _var_.

# Reference implementation

Work progresses on implementing this functionality; the currently
committed version is on SourceForge in the branch labeled,
_kennykb-tcl-22-33_.

# Discussion

Since this proposed change introduces syntax that is expressly forbidden in
[[22]](22.md) and [[33]](33.md), it does not have any impact on backward compatibility.
For the same reason, the author thought it unwise to proceed with its
implementation without a vote of the TCT.

# See Also

[[22]](22.md), [[33]](33.md).

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

