# TIP 450: Add [binary] subcommand "set" for in-place modification
	Author:		Arjen Markus <arjen.markus895@gmail.com>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Pending
	Created:	18-Jul-2016
	Post-History: 
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Keywords:	Tcl, binary data
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a simpler extension of the [binary] command than the related
[[418]](418.md), namely just a subcommand **set** that updates an existing byte array
in a variable instead of creating a new one like **binary format**. It does
not propose an extension of the various formatting codes.

# Rationale

As already argued in [[418]](418.md), the **binary** command is efficient in creating
new objects of binary data or in parsing existing objects with such data. It
is not currently efficient in _updating_ existing objects. However, such
data objects are commonly used by compiled extensions.

As a consequence, if you want to manipulate such data objects from Tcl
directly, it is easier to parse the object into, say, a list of numbers, use
list commands like **lset** to replace individual values and pack it into a
new binary array before passing it to a compiled extension.

# Specification

This TIP proposes to add a subcommand **set** to the **binary** command
with the following signature:

 > **binary set** _varName formatString arg1 arg2 arg3 ..._

The effect of this subcommand is that the byte array data contained in the
variable "varName" is updated in a manner analogous to **lset**, but using a
format string like **binary format**. It could be implemented in Tcl as:

 > set varName [binary format "a*$formatString" $varName $arg1 $arg2 $arg3 ...]

except that this allocates a new block of memory, sets that to null, copies
the contents of _varName_ into that new block and then does the update.

The new command will have the effect that the first few steps are not
necessary anymore.

# Implementation Notes

Besides the nominal case of a variable that contains a binary array that is to
be updated within the bounds of that array, three other cases exist and need
to be prepared for:

 * The variable varName does not exist yet

 * The variable varName does not contain a binary array

 * The updating would go past the memory allocated for the binary array

Each of these cases and perhaps others will have to be taken care of. The
first case might be treated as if **binary format** was meant. For the
second case the implementation can convert the current value.

The third case might either cause an error \(we are updating an existing block
of memory after all\) or silently extend the memory, effectively performing
what the Tcl implementation shown above would do. If an error is thrown, then
the first case should probably throw an error as well.

# Reference Implementation

To be committed to a fossil branch.

A few remarks:

 * The third case is not completely treated yet \(see "TODO" in the code\)

 * The **binary set** command does not properly invalidate the string
   representation. The binary array is, however, updated properly - at least
   according to the very limited tests that were performed.

 * There are no proper test cases yet.

 * There is no proper performance measurement yet; this could be based
   on Wiki page <http://wiki.tcl.tk/44363.>

 * It does not deal with the possibility that the binary array is shared.

# Copyright

This document is placed in public domain.

