# TIP 451: Modify [update] to Give Full Script Access to Tcl_DoOneEvent
	Author:         Colin McCormack <mcccol@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        10-Aug-2016
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl,event loop
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     updateextended
-----

# Abstract

This TIP add flags to **update** to represent all the flag values available
to the underlying API, _Tcl\_DoOneEvent\(\)_, exposing them to script access.

# Rationale

The **update** command provides a way into the event loop in addition to **vwait**.  Because the Tcl event system derived historically from Tk, **update** was written specifically to support Tk's window and idle events.
When Tcl adopted the event system for timers and file events, the **update** command was anomalously not updated to cater for these new event types.

The reason this anomaly is worth correcting is that Tcl\_DoOneEvent is the actual entry into the event loop and there is no good or sufficient reason for **update** to limit the flags to those specific to Tk only.

While **vwait** provides a reasonable way into and out of the event loop, there's no good reason to impose that communication mechanism on the application when there are other approaches possible, arguably more useful, and amply provided for by the underlying C implementation.

# Proposal

The **update** command should have the following flags added to it:

 * **idletasks** - process any pending window events or idle events, do not wait \(this is as currently supported\)

 * **window** - process window events

 * **file** - process file events

 * **timer** - process timer events

 * **onlyidle** - process only idle events

 * **all** - process all events

 * **wait** - wait until at least one event has been processed

 * **nowait** - return immediately if no events are pending.

 and they should be painted Pantone 13-1520

The somewhat klunky and denormalised logical form of these flags is imposed by the requirement to minimally disrupt existing **update** functionality.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is available in Tcl core fossil under tag
_updateextended_.

# Use Case 1

Application of **after idle** constructs a collection of _idle tasks._  An _idle task_ represents something to be performed when no events are pending.  This proposal exposes the idle state directly to a Tcl script and the application can do what it will in that state.

Use Case Summary: "I would like to handle _idle tasks_ in some particular or specific order, at script level."

# Use Case 2

A script may have accepted network file i/o for some time, and have a number of pending background \(aka idle\) tasks to perform as a result of that i/o.  It may wish to throttle acceptance of connections, or further read events, pending that background processing.

Use Case Summary: As a special case of "I would like direct control over my 'idle' time.", "I would like to throttle network input."

# Rejected Alternatives

One could create a new command for this functionality, but the minimal impact
on most Tcl users doesn't seem to me to warrant additional population of the
:: command namespace.

One could move **update** out of Tcl altogether \(to avoid its explicit dependency on Tk events\) into Tk.  This would open up the :: namespace to a more general event-handling mechanism.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain. In legislations where this
concept does not exist the CC0 license applies.

