# TIP 452: Add "stubs" Package to or Along Side of TclTest
	Author:         Gerald Lester <Gerald.Lester@SAP.com>
	Author:         Gerald W. Lester <gerald.lester@KnG-Consulting.net>
	Author:         Gerald W. Lester <Gerald.Lester@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        10-Aug-2016
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Vote-Results:   2/4/3 rejection in favour of further work
	Votes-For:      KBK, JD
	Votes-Against:  DKF, JN, DGP, AK
	Votes-Present:  BG, FV, SL
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-452
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes an enhancement to the **tcltest** package to add support
for easy creation of test stubs, mocks and seams.

# Rationale

The **tcltest** package allows for automated testing of Tcl code. However,
doing proper automated unit testing requires that the unit under test \(i.e.,
the method or procedure\) not invoke the actual implementation of other units,
but rather should invoke stub or mock units that are under the control of the
test being performed as to the results they return and any exceptions they
raise.

This TIP adds support for building these mechanisms, making it significantly
easier to create isolated unit tests of Tcl code.

# Proposal

That a framework to easily create test stubs/mocks of
Tcl commands be added to the **tcltest** package.  Additionally, to facilitate the creation of automated test for legacy Tcl code.  Commands supporting _test
seam_ creation and specification would also be included proposed package.

## Description

It provides a fully functional implementation of the
following commands:

 * **::tcltest::TestSetup** - Defines which procedures/commands are stubbed out
   and how they should behave for each invocation. This should only be called
   once per test.

 * **::tcltest::AddStub** - Adds a procedures/commands to the list that are
   stubbed out.

 * **::tcltest::SaveVars** - Saves the values of variables to be restored later.
   This should only be called once per test.

 * **::tcltest::AddVars** - Add a variable to the list of variables to be
   restored later

 * **::tcltest::CallCount** - Returns a dictionary sorted list of the stubbed
   out procedures and how many times they were called.

 * **::tcltest::TestCleanup** - Restores saved variables and stubbed out
   procedures.

 * **::tcltest::SortedArrayData** - Return the values of an array as a list of
   key-value pairs sorted by the keys.

 * **::tcltest::CallProc** - Call the real implementation of a stubbed out
   procedure.

 * **::tcltest::Seam** - Test seam definition and injection \(aka enabling\).  This command is available without requiring the tcltest package. 

# Reference Implementation

See the [tip-452 branch](http://core.tcl.tk/tcl/timeline?n=100&r=tip-452), in particular, see `http-tip-452.test` for an example of using the procedures added by this package.

## Origins of Reference Implementation

The reference implementation was done at SAP Labs, LLC \(a subsidiary of SAP
Americal, Inc.\) and approved for release as Open Source under a BSD license.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

