# TIP 453: Tcl Based Automation for tcl/pkgs
	Author:         Sean Woods <yoda@etoyoc.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        13-Sep-2016
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Build tooling
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Implementation-URL: https://core.tcl-lang.org/tclconfig/timeline?r=practcl
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes replacing the **make package** process currently employed
by the core with a Tcl-based build automation tool.

# Background

[[376]](376.md) provides for the distribution of third party packages in the Tcl/Tk core
distributions. To support that TIP currently requires three separate build
automations: a Makefile based automation in Unix, and both an nmake and
Makefile based automation for Windows. These automation systems can get out of
sync and they assume that their job is to build dynamic libraries for local
installation.

# The Pitch

By the time **make packages** has run, the local Tcl interpreter has been
built already. Rather than rely on delicate hacks and makefile tricks, core
distributed packages could be built and installed via exec commands inside a
Tcl script. In addition, this same automation could handle functions like
injecting a core distributed package into a virtual file system, as well as
bundling the Tcl/Tk library file system for [[430]](430.md).

# The Implementation

For the _practcl_ branch of tclconfig, I put together a 4000 line
self-contained package and kit building library of tools. This library is
TclOO based, and provides a rudimentary \(but functional\) system for templating
C code in Tcl, as well as a build system that is capable of nesting
sub-projects. It also steals the useful bits from the **fileutil** module of
tcllib, providing implementations for concatenating files, performing file
searches, and building a global package index from a soup of modules. The
library also has a wrapper to download external sources from fossil. It also
contains procs that can compile a static library, dynamic library, or self
contained shell directly from exec calls.

I would propose that this tool system \(or a new creation by the community in a
similar spirit\) be included in the library/ section of the tcl core. The
provisional name for this tool set would be **practcl**. A version of this
tool could also be provided in tcllib to allow 8.5 and 8.6 based cores to
continue to build extensions.

In the new scheme, **make packages** \(in all its forms\) would be replaced
with a call to "_$\(TCLSH\) $\{srcdir\}/pkgs/make.tcl build_". **make
packages-install** would be replaced by a call to "_$\(TCLSH\)
$\{srcdir\}/pkgs/make.tcl install_". For advanced users, these toplevel commands
**build** and **install** will accept additional arguments. For instance,
to install the core distributed packages into the VFS of a kit: "_$\(TCLSH\)
$\{srcdir\}/make.tcl install -destdir $\{MyVFS\}/lib_".

# pkgs/make.tcl

**make.tcl** would be maintained as part of the core, and provide the
top-level control system to build, install, or repackage the core distributed
extensions. That script will also provide mechanisms to populate the pkgs file
system for developers who build the tcl core from fossil checkouts.

Commands:

 * **basekit**

	 > Compile a ZipFs style basekit suitable for the **wrap** command.

 * **build** ?**all**? ?_package_? ?_package..._?

	 > Compile the source code for core distributed packages into binary products
   \(as applicable.\) If **all** is given, an attempt is made to compile all
   packages under _pkgs/_. Any other argument is interpreted to be the name
   of an individual package to be compiled.

 * **install** ?**-destdir** _destinationpath_?

	 > Install all core distributed packages locally. If **-destdir** is given,
   install the packages relative to _destinationpath_ in the same way that
   "**make DESTDIR=** _destdir_" would. If **-destdir** is not given, or
   is an empty string, perform an install relative to the **exec\_prefix** in
   **tclConfig.sh**

 * **wrap** _exename_ _vfspath_ ?_dir..._?

	 > Generate a self contained executable constructed from the virtual file
    system amalgamated from _vfspath_ and any other directories given as
    arguments. This VFS will automatically be populated with the
    **library/** file system from Tcl.

 * **distribution**

	> Download packages listed in the "packages.tcl" file, unpack their source 
    code in the /pkgs folder, and perform any steps required to prepare those
    extensions for inclusion in a core snapshot for distribution.

 * **developer**

	> Download packages listed in the "packages.tcl" file, unpack their source 
    code in the parent folder to the one the core has been unpacked from,
    and perform any steps required to prepare those extensions to be compiled
    locally as part of a developer build. This is intended for developers who work
    from fossil checkouts of the Tcl core.

 * **package-list**

	> Stream to stdout a list of all of the packages in the packages.tcl file, in a flat
    machine readable format.

# Tk

This same mechanism will be adapted for Tk. Tk will be also provide a
**pkgs/** directory. Its base kits will be based on a modified _wish_
instead of a modified _tclsh_.

# Normal Operation

During the build/install/etc phase each directory will be scanned for either
a "configure" file or a "prac.tcl" file. Standard TEA extensions will be detected
by the presence of a "configure" file. The prac.tcl file is a hint to the build
system that the package needs either additional instructions and guidance.
The contents of the file are interpreted by the object which is implementing the
extension's ambassador to the build system.

If one were to decide to bundle tcllib, and wished to exercise its SAK based installer
the prac.tcl file would read:

	# Implement the install routine for tcllib
	#
	oo::objdefine [self] {
	  method install DEST {
	    set pkg [my define get pkg_name [my define get name]]
	    my unpack
	    set prefix [string trimleft [my <project> define get prefix] /] 
	    set srcdir [my define get srcdir]
	    ::practcl::dotclexec [file join $srcdir installer.tcl] \
	      -pkg-path [file join $DEST $prefix lib $pkg] \ -no-examples -no-html -no-nroff \
	      -no-wait -no-gui -no-apps
	  }
	}

# Maintaining the Package List

Each **pkgs/** file system for both Tcl and Tk will also contain a file
**packages.tcl**. This file will be human and machine readable. It contains
a description of every core distributed package, where the sources can be
found, as well as which fossil tags can be utilized as either development or
release with this particular version of the core.

**packages.txt** contains a series of keywords populating a data structure.

A simple example would by the tclconfig templates from TEA:

	EXTENSION tclconfig {
	   tag  trunk
	   fossil_url https://core.tcl-lang.org/tclconfig
	}

The EXTENSION keyword is intended to take the following arguments:

 > _name_ _key/value-configuration-dict_

## Reserved keys

### tag
Source code management tag for the release bundled with this edition of the core

### fossil\_url
If the extension is managed via fossil, a url that can be fed to "fossil clone". If no tag is specified "trunk" is assumed.

### git\_url
If the extension is managed via git, a url that can be fed to "git clone". If no tag is specified "HEAD" is assumed

### file\_url
If the extension is only available via source snapshot, a url where the file can be downloaded. 
Supported formats are .tar.gz and .zip.

The list is kept separate from the actual **make.tcl** so that users can simply
steal the list for making "batteries included" distributions. It also allows the package list
to remain distinct for each branch of the core.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

