# TIP 456: Extend the C API to Support Passing Options to TCP Server Creation
	Author:         LemonBoy <that.lemon@gmail.com>
	Author:         lime boy <thatlemon@gmail.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        18-Nov-2016
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl,socket,SO_REUSEPORT,SO_REUSEADDR
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

The **Tcl\_OpenTcpServer** interface doesn't provide enough flexibility as
experienced during the implementation of the scaffolding necessary to support
the **SO\_REUSEPORT** flag for sockets. This TIP adds that capability through
a new API function, **Tcl\_OpenTcpServerEx**, that takes extra options.

# Rationale

Currently there's no way to pass extra informations to **Tcl\_OpenTcpServer**
which is the function that does the heavy lifting by wrapping the socket
creation and connection phase.

For example, during the implementation of a **-reuseport** option for the
**socket** command, a roadblock was hit since informing
**Tcl\_OpenTcpServer** about the presence of the new flag was only possible
via hacks such as exploiting the upper unused bits of the port parameter or
its sign bit.

A clean solution that also paves the way to the implementation of other
switches \(such as one for the SO\_REUSEADDR flag\) is to introduce another
function named **Tcl\_OpenTcpServerEx** whose signature closely matches the
**Tcl\_OpenTcpServer** but allows passing a set of flags to customize its
behaviour.

Following the aforementioned changes to the C API the **socket** command is
enhanced with two new options allowing the user to take advantage of the newly
introduced flags.

# Specification

A **Tcl\_OpenTcpServerEx** function is introduced with the following
signature:

 > Tcl\_Channel **Tcl\_OpenTcpServerEx**\(Tcl\_Interp \*_interp_, const char \*
    _service_, const char \*_myHost_, unsigned int _flags_, 
    Tcl\_TcpAcceptProc \*_acceptProc_, ClientData _acceptProcData_\)

Most arguments are identical to **Tcl\_OpenTcpServer** with the exception of
the _port_ parameter being replaced by the _service_ one taking a string
instead of an integer.  Two entries for the _flags_ bitset are defined by this 
TIP:

 * **TCL\_TCPSERVER\_REUSEADDR** - indicate that the socket flag SO\_REUSEADDR \(or
   equivalent\) should be set.

 * **TCL\_TCPSERVER\_REUSEPORT** - indicate that the socket flag SO\_REUSEPORT \(or
   equivalent\) should be set.

The **Tcl\_OpenTcpServer** function is then rewritten to be an alias of
**Tcl\_OpenTcpServerEx** with the **flags** parameter set by default to
TCL\_TCPSERVER\_REUSEADDR so that we keep the API and behaviour compatible with the
previous Tcl versions.

As for the Tcl side, the **socket** command gains two new optional switches
that are only valid for server sockets: **?-reuseaddr boolean?** and
**?-reuseport boolean?**, both accepting a boolean argument to either turn off
or on the selected behaviour.

# Reference Implementation

Please refer to the _tip-456_ branch of the core Tcl repository.

# Backwards Compatibility

Since **Tcl\_OpenTcpServer** can be easily re-implemented in terms of 
**Tcl\_OpenTcpServerEx** the old behaviour is retained.

The **socket** command defaults to **-reuseaddr** set to _yes_ as it was
already doing before, the user is now able to turn off this behaviour by using
**-reuseaddr no**.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

