# TIP 458: Add Support for epoll() and kqueue() in the Notifier
	Author:         Lucio Andrés Illanes Albornoz <l.illanes@gmx.de>
	Author:         Lucio Andrés Illanes Albornoz <lucio@lucioillanes.de>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        24-Nov-2016
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       event loop,scalability
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-458
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to replace _select_\(2\) in the notifier implementation with _epoll_\(7\) and _kqueue_\(2\) on Linux and DragonFly-, Free-, Net-, and OpenBSD respectively. This is to remove a major bottleneck in the ability of Tcl to scale up to thousands and tens of thousands of sockets \(aka **C10K**\).
Furthermore, this should also provide sufficient infrastructure in order to permit adding support for other platform-specific event mechanisms in the future, such as IOCPs on Solaris and Windows.

# Rationale

The drawbacks associated with _poll_\(2\) and _select_\(2\) and the tremendously improved ability to scale of _epoll_\(7\) and _kqueue_\(2\) are well-known <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C10k_problem> ; a previous attempt at implementing this feature elaborates on this subject and can be found at <https://sourceforge.net/p/tcl/mailman/tcl-core/?viewmonth=200909&viewday=10> .

Initially, the notifier thread was retained to provide for event notification and inter-thread IPC. This eventually proved unnecessary and thus the _epoll_\(7\)/_kqueue_\(2\) source modules now no longer contain the notifier thread and its infrastructure, particularly as this also reduces code size and complexity.

Threads that intend to wait on one or more file descriptors they own will now directly call _epoll\_wait_\(2\)/_kevent_\(2\) themselves during _Tcl\_WaitForEvent_\(\).  Inter-thread IPC is provided for by a per-thread trigger pipe, analogous to the trigger pipe of the notifier thread. On Linux, an _eventfd_\(2\) is used instead, which only requires one single fd. Furthermore, events for regular files are not processed via _epoll_\(7\), as it does not support them at present. Instead, events for regular files are immediately returned by the notifier when waiting for events.

The new implementation of the notifier only has two minor drawbacks:

 1. Each thread that has called _Tcl\_WaitForEvent_\(\) at least once will create an _epoll_\(7\)/_kqueue_\(2\) file descriptor.

 2. All threads create two _pipe_\(2\) file descriptors for inter-thread IPC; on Linux, one single _eventfd_\(2\) is created and used.

Therefore, threads that have waited on events at least once now own an additional amount of three/two file descriptors. Whether this could prove to be a problem remains a point of contention that should be subject to further discussion.

As far as the notifier implementation is concerned, threads do not share data structures or file descriptors; IPC is provided for explicitly. However, a thread may queue events to and then alert another thread in order to allow for less primitive forms of IPC. Therefore, the previously static mutex protecting the notifier list has become a per-thread mutex. Instead of protecting the notifier list, it protects per-thread event queues from event queue/unqueue race conditions. This only applies to the _epoll_\(7\)/_kqueue_\(2\)-based notifier implementations.

The majority of Tcl code should be unable to observe any difference at the script level.

# Specification

At present, code changes are almost entirely constrained to either _unix/tclEpollNotfy.c_ wherever _epoll_\(7\) is supported or _unix/tclKqueueNotfy.c_ wherever _kqueue_\(2\) is supported. The original _select_\(2\)-based notifier implementation now lives in _unix/tclSelectNotfy.c_.

Subroutines shared between _unix/tcl\{Epoll,Kqueue\}Notfy.c_ have been moved to _unix/tclUnixNotfy.c_, which is **\#include**d by the former. As explained in the last section of this document, the previously static mutex in _generic/tclNotify.c_ has become a per-thread mutex.

The new code associates the newly introduced \(but private\) _PlatformEventData_ structure with each file descriptor to wait on and its corresponding _FileHandler_ struct. _PlatformEventData_ contains:

 1. A pointer to the _FileHandler_ the file descriptor belongs to. This specifically facilitates updating the platform-specific mask of new events for the file descriptor of a _FileHandler_ after returning from _epoll\_wait_\(2\)/_kevent_\(2\) in _NotifierThreadProc_\(\).

 2. A pointer to the _ThreadSpecificData_ of the thread to whom the _FileHandler_ belongs. This specifically facilitates alerting threads waiting on one or more _FileHandlers_ in _NotifierThreadProc_\(\).

The core implementation is found in a set of six \(6\) newly introduced static subroutines in _unix/tcl\{Epoll,Kqueue\}Notfy.c_:

 1. _PlatformEventsControl_\(\) - abstracts _epoll\_ctl_\(2\)/_kevent_\(2\). Called by _Tcl\_\{Create,Delete\}FileHandler_\(\) to add/update event masks for a new or an old _FileHandler_ and _NotifierThreadProc_\(\) in order to include the _receivePipe_ fd when waiting for and processing events.

 2. _PlatformEventsFinalize_\(\) - abstracts _close_\(2\) and _ckfree_\(\). Called by _Tcl\_FinalizeNotifier_\(\).

 3. _PlatformEventsGet_\(\) - abstracts iterating over an array of events. Called by _NotifierThreadProc_\(\).

 4. _PlatformEventsInit_\(\) - abstracts _epoll\_create_\(2\)/_kqueue_\(2\). Called by _PlatformEvents\{Control,Wait\}_\(\) and _Tcl\_WaitForEvent_\(\).

 5. _PlatformEventsTranslate_\(\) - translates platform-specific event masks to **TCL\_\{READABLE,WRITABLE,EXCEPTION\}** bits. Called by _Tcl\_WaitForEvent_\(\).

 6. _PlatformEventsWait_\(\) - abstracts _epoll\_wait_\(2\)/_kevent_\(2\). Called by _Tcl\_WaitForEvent_\(\) and _NotifierThreadProc_\(\). 

Two additional subroutine are used in all three code paths \(_epoll_, _kqueue_, _select_\) to reduce code redundancy:

 1. _AlertSingleThread_\(\) - notify a single thread that is waiting on I/O. Called by _NotifierThreadProc_\(\).

 2. _TclUnixWaitForFile\(\) - reimplemented via _poll_\(2\) instead of _select_\(2\), as _poll_\(2\) does not suffer the **FD\_SETSIZE** limit on file descriptors that can be passed to _select_\(2\) and is available on a sufficiently large number of platforms. Most importantly, this code would not benefit from using _epoll_\(7\) or _kqueue_\(2\) as this subroutine only waits on one single file descriptor at a time.

_PlatformEventsInit_\(\) currently defaults to allocating space for 128 array members of _struct epoll\_event/kevent_. This could preferably be handled through e.g. _fconfigure_.

Originally, a mutex used to protect the _epoll_\(7\)/_kqueue_\(2\) file descriptor and the above mentioned array. This proved to be redundant as _epoll\_ctl_\(2\) can be called whilst blocking on _epoll\_wait_\(2\) on Linux and as _kevent_\(2\) can be called whilst blocking on _kevent_\(2\) on FreeBSD.

Lastly, the _configure_ script is updated to define **HAVE\_EPOLL** or **HAVE\_KQUEUE** as appropriate.

# Reference implementation

Please refer to the _tip-458_ branch. The code is licensed under the BSD license.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain. In legislations where this concept does not exist the BSD license applies.

