# TIP 459: Tcl Package Introspection Improvements
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        08-Dec-2016
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl,package
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     package_files
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to improve package introspection by providing a new command
**package files**.

# Rationale

This TIP is inspired by a request from FlightAware to improve Tcl's package
introspection possibilities. Although only a **package files** command was
requested, extending **info loaded** gives the possibility to find a shared
library contained in a package more easily than searching a list.

# Specification of the proposed Change

Two new additions are proposed, to the **package** and **info** commands.

 1. **package files** _name_

	  > This command returns a list of filenames which were sourced during the
    initialization of package _name_. More specific, the files that were
    sourced during running the script registered using **package ifneeded**.
    Left out are Tcl's own tclIndex and pkgIndex.tcl files, which might have been
    accessed due to dependancy searches, otherwise this would give very
    misleading results.

 1. **info loaded** ?_interpreter_? ?_name_?

	  > The **info loaded** command already exists, it gives a list of package
    names with corresponding shared library names which were actually loaded
    in the give interpreter. The additional _name_ argument restricts the
    result to the filename of the loaded library only.

Tcl packages don't have to do anything special in order to be introspected
correctly, just note that files containing auto\_loaded commands cannot be
introspected because they are not sourced during package initialization.

# Rejected alternatives

  > Use of _source -nopkg_ in tclIndex files. Even though this addition in the
  earlier TIP was explicitly undocumented, it lead to the misunderstanding
  that other Tcl extensions should do the same.

  > Earlier implementation of this TIP didn't handle the second argument of
  **info loaded** correctly in all cases, and the handling in safe
  interpreters was not complete. This is all corrected in the current implementation.

  > All filenames should be converted to absolute. This is rejected for performance
  and for practical reasons. It could be quite expensive to calculate because
  the disk has to be accessed for possible hyper-links. Second, the package
  mechanism is already designed such that all sourced paths are absolute \(see
  below example\). Extensions using the **source** command with relative
  paths are in danger already, this should be fixed in the extension in
  stead of being masked in the **package files** command.

  > Additional information about the sourced files \(like mtime or checksum\) was
  suggested to be part of the introspection information, but this has been
  rejected as overkill. It is much more than requested in the Tcl-bounty, and
  it is difficult to imagine what actual use this would bring.

# Reference Implementation

This is available in the _package\_files_ branch
<http://core.tcl.tk/tcl/timeline?r=package_files> .

# Examples

	$ tclsh8.7
	% package files Tcl
	/usr/lib/tcl8.7/init.tcl
	% package require Tk
	8.7a0
	% package files msgcat
	/usr/lib/tcl8/8.5/msgcat-1.6.0.tm
	% package files Tk
	/usr/lib/tk8.7/tk.tcl /usr/lib/tk8.7/msgs/en.msg /usr/lib/tk8.7/icons.tcl ...
	% info loaded {} Tk
	/usr/lib/libtk8.7.so

Note that **package require Tk** has the side-effect of loading the _msgcat_ package, which is required by Tk.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

Please note that any correspondence to the author concerning this TIP is
considered in the public domain unless otherwise specifically requested by the
individual\(s\) authoring said correspondence. This is to allow information
about the TIP to be placed in a public forum for discussion.

