# TIP 460: An Alternative to Upvar
	Author:         Don Hathway <dunnie@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        08-Dec-2016
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl,variable,link,upvar
	Tcl-Version:    9.0
-----

# Abstract

Variable linking with the _upvar_ command is not as intuitive or effecient
as it should be. This TIP proposes an alternative through automatic variable
linking.

# Rationale

The current strategy used to link a variable in a called procedure to the
caller, is to pass the name of the variable to the procedure, and use the
_upvar_ command to create a new variable, which is then linked to the
original. Thus linking to a variable requires two components; the variable
name and a newly created variable.

It is possible to instruct Tcl to do this linking automatically in an idiomatic way
and dispense with the _upvar_ command call.

Also, the requirement \(by _upvar_\) that the name of the new link variable be a 
different name from the original is arguably considered counter-intuitive.

Benefits to this TIP as proposed:

 1. **No code to perform explicit linking within the procedure's body.**
    Unlike _upvar_, this method requires no additional code to be entered in
    the body of the procedure. Less code, less bugs, easier to use! It has
    been said that Tcl'ers should make more use of variable linking in their
    code. Making it easier for them should have an encouraging effect, similar
    to how most Tcl'ers prefer _$var_ over _set var_.

 2. **Clearly defines links in the procedure's parameter list.** Readers
    should instantly know what the links are.  Clarity is important,
    especially for people that read code all day. There are no special project
    naming conventions to follow. A reader doesn't have to rely on docs or
    assume that a parameter name of "varName", "\_var", or "varLnk" is to be
    linked by an upvar call, of which may be pushed down in the procedure's
    body by comments or other code.

 3. **Alleviates arguably messy _upvar_ chain linking.**

## Upvar Chaining Example

Below are three _upvar_s with the same arguments. As you can see, there is
quite a bit of arguably unnecessary code duplication, and that is bug prone.

	 proc foo {a} {
	    upvar 1 $a la
	    maybe do something with la
	    bar la
	 }
	 proc bar {a} {
	    upvar 1 $a la
	    maybe do something with la
	    baz la
	 }
	 proc baz {a} {
	    upvar 1 $a la
	    maybe do something with la
	 }
	 foo begin

This could be written more succinctly:

	 proc foo {*a} {
	    maybe do something with a
	    bar a
	 }
	 proc bar {*a} {
	    maybe do something with a
	    baz a
	 }
	 proc baz {*a} {
	    maybe do something with a
	 }
	 foo begin

# Specification

Add support to procedure handling to allow for a parametric hint to procedure
definitions with respect to the intent to link variables accordingly. We use
the asterisk character "**\***" as the symbol to declare this intent; which
shall prefix the parameter's name. Consequently, the "**\***" character becomes 
special, but only inside the procedure parameter list. A procedure definition using 
this facility would then have the signature:

	 proc foo {*a *b} {...}

Where **\*a** and **\*b** are the procedure's parameters to be linked to the
caller's arguments. New variables are then created for the future linking. In this example
**\*a** creates a new link variable named **a**, and likewise done for **\*b**.
**\*a** and **\*b** holds the values passed in by the caller.

The formal parameter's shall retain the same values provided by the caller.

The link variable's name shall always have one **\*** symbol less than its counterpart parameter, for the sake of consistency.  In example, a parameter named **\*\*\*a** shall have a counterpart link variable named **\*\*a**. Similarily **\*\*a** shall have a counterpart link named **\*a**.

Where there are duplicate link parameter names \(i.e. proc P \{\*a \*a\}\) the behavior shall be the same as if there were duplicate **upvar** statements.

It is legal to have empty link variable names. It shall be possible with a single **\*** in
the procedure's parameter list \(i.e. proc P \{\*\} \{incr ""\}\). The same duplicate name rule applies.

If the variable to be linked does not exist, it shall be created, if necessary. It shall have the same behavior as **upvar 1** in such instances.

When a link's construction fails, the behavior shall be the same as if **upvar** had failed, the procedure will
return with an error before any other commands \(with exception to any commands involved in the link's construction\) in its body are executed.

It is illegal for a link parameter to have a default value. It shall invoke an error during procedure
creation time and result in failed procedure creation with the error code:

	 Tcl_SetErrorCode(interp, "TCL", "OPERATION", "PROC","FORMALARGUMENTFORMAT", NULL);

An example of such an error for:
	 proc P {{*a foo}} {...}
Would be: "procedure "P": formal parameter "\*a"  is to be linked and must not have a default value"

In that example, proc **P** is never created, the attempt failed due to the error.

It is the caller's responsibility to provide the names of variables to be linked. This 
constraint exists in the spirit of promoting good coding practices and to help avoid 
obscure and subtle bugs. For the same reasons, this TIP only searches one level up.
Therefore, It shall have the same behavior as **upvar 1**.

**\*args** is a valid parameter name. For example, **args** is simply a
link in:

	 proc foo {a *args} {
	     incr args
	 }

Note that as of this TIP _proc foo \{args args\} \{...\}_ is legal Tcl. In this
instance only the first _scalar_ **args** is usable by the procedure. The
rest of the arguments are inaccessible by the script. They're not internally
lost, but Tcl's variable lookup mechanics will choose whichever is found first
when a script references it. This behavior is inherited for _proc foo \{\*args
args\} \{...\}_. Where **args** will be a link.

To further illustrate this proposal with an example:

	 proc foo {*a *b} {
	   bar a b
	 }

	 proc bar {*a *b} {
	   incr a
	   incr b
	 }

	 set v1 0
	 set v2 1
	 foo v1 v2
	 puts $v1
	 # prints 1
	 puts $v2
	 # prints 2

	 # Version of foo using upvar:
	 proc foo {a b} {
	    # Note, upvar $a a would be an error.
	    upvar 1 $a la $b lb
	    bar la lb
	 }
	 proc bar {a b} {
	    upvar 1 $a la $b lb
	    incr la
	    incr lb
	 }

The "**\***" character was chosen primarily because it
resembles a star or a snowflake and has a pleasantry to it. It is one of the few
ascii characters that **sticks out** from its surrounding text. 

It is also familiar to users of other languages where the same symbol exhibits similar
semantics \(to wit: a link in Tcl acts as a reference to another variable and doesn't perform 
a copy when the reference is written to, as it would if it weren't a link\). However, 
unlike other languages, the Tcl core does not expose operations to user scripts that work directly on 
memory, so the "**\***" character should not be mistaken to behave the same or suffer from the same 
pitfalls as it does in C, C\+\+, Golang, etc. The **\*** symbol simply instructs Tcl to 
create a link if it is able to do so.

## Consequences

 1. Breaks scripts using the special "**\***" as the first character in their
    procedure's parameters \(i.e. **\*var**\).

	  > The impact of this should be minimal because these variable names require
    the user to wrap it in curly braces \(i.e. **$\{\*var\}**\) to fetch their
    values, unless they're using the less common form of **set varname**.

# Reference Implementation

See branch _dah-proc-arg-upvar_

## Implementation Notes

 tclInt.h: Add a new field named _numArgsCompiledLocals_ to the Proc struct.
  The new field holds the number of parameters along with any other relevant
  local variables which follow immediately after the parameters. For this TIP,
  these additional locals are variables with the VAR\_LINK flag and to be resolved 
  as links to the values of arguments they've been configured to link with.

  The additional field was a hard choice, but is necessary because _TclProcCompileProc_ 
  enforces _procPtr->numCompiledLocals_ to be the same value as _procPtr->numArgs_. 
  The local variable table is evidently not growable until later.

 tclProc.c: Modify _InitArgsAndLocals_ to do the automatic linking. Note
  that this is a _very hot_ function and that was kept in mind while making
  the necessary adjustments. There are two additional branches in the function
  \(the second only visited when an error happens\). The first to check if the
  command has any parameters that need linking and if so, process them with
  link support handling code. The second branch is to simply check if the link
  handling code set an error when an error occurs, so this branch should not
  be a concern as to performance impact. Due to branch prediction and this
  function being so hot, there should be virtually nil of a performance impact 
  on any code which doesn't make use of the new automatic linking facility.

 tclProc.c: Modify _TclCreateProc_ to add additional locals after the list
 of parameter locals \(if any\) when there are parameters flagged for auto linking.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

