# TIP 465: Change Rule 8 of the Dodekalogue to Cut Some Corner Cases
	Author:         Andreas Leitgeb <avl@logic.at>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        03-Mar-2017
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to make **$**-substitution more conforming to naive
expectations and just rule out certain odd-ball uses that can safely be
assumed to not appear in serious use, but only in crafted examples "serving"
for confusion, or as accidentally legal interpretation of mistyped Tcl code.

# Rationale

Back in the days where **$**-substitution was added to Tcl, it was designed
to be as syntactically simple as possible. Back then, Tcl was still an
interpreted language, so optimising parse time was top priority.  For this, it
was designed that a sequence starting with **$\{** would end at the **next
close brace** no matter how many open braces or backslashes are passed by,
and **$arr\(** would end at the **next close paren** no matter how many
open parens are found before.  This enables odd-ball corner cases that work in
an interactive shell at top level, as tried by newbies:

	   set "{{{" 42; puts ${{{{}

but fail within a braced block, unless a comment like:

	   # }}} }}}

follows within the same block. These are just strange parts of Tcl, that
nobody can seriously claim to use for good.

Another surprising part is with arrays, where parens are treated
asymmetrically, in that any number of bare open parens, but also quote chars
or braces may be part of the index in a **$arr\(...\)** substitution, but
first bare close paren terminates the token.  Quote characters or braces have
no significance, apart from that bare close braces might pre-maturely finish
the enclosing braced block, which may only be evident to seasoned Tclers - and
not even always to them.

The final motivation for writing up this TIP came while discussing one part of
[[282]](282.md): assignment to array elements.

An informal poll showed a clear preference towards bare **array\(...\)**
naming on left hand side of proposed assignment, without sympathy for any need
of explicit disambiguation by quoting or tagging.

Generally disallowing bare open parens, quotes and braces within array indices
would mean that array indices on left hand side of an assignment could follow
same rules as on right hand side, and parsing an array by these new rules
would make sure, that where parsing as a function call and parsing as an array
are both successful, then both parses would end up consuming the same portion
of the expression body - a prerequisite for making a sound decision about
following assignment operator.

Without having array parses and function parses agreeing on close paren, then
it is possible that parsing as an array will see a trailing assignment
operator that would otherwise have been nested in a subexpression, or even
part of a quoted literal value.

Because of the low expected impact on real code, a target of 8.7 is considered
feasible.

# Implementation

A full implementation of this TIP is now checked in on branch _tip-465_.

# Alternatives

The following points show alternatives that would make sense, but would make
the currently rather simple implementation of this TIP ways more complicated:

 * Allow bare parens in array indices if properly paired. Quotes and braces
   are still disallowed \(even if paired\), to avoid cases of bad nesting:
   **\{\(\}\)**.  This might save users two backslashes in some rare cases where
   a close paren in the index is already backslash-escaped.

 * Specifically add backslash-quoting to the "body" of **$\{...\}**.  After
   all, the "body" is a variable name, and not a nested structure like most
   braced words in Tcl. This would make some odd variable names once again
   possible, but now in a consistent syntax that doesn't affect enclosing
   blocks.

 * **$\{...\}** syntax could also be further restricted by disallowing open
   braces and final backslashes, just to enforce "well-behaving" tokens.

 * A much stricter alternative would disallow unbalanced braces even within
   "-quoted and unquoted literals. This would disallow common but dangerous
   idioms like _append var "\{"_, which may be followed by an _append var
   "\}"_ in the same block and work, until one of these two commands gets
   moved into a nested block. The correct and safe way is, of course,
   backslash-escaping bare braces within string literals.  Good Code\(tm\)
   wouldn't be affected by this alternative change.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

