# TIP 466: Revised Implementation of the Text Widget
	Author:         François Vogel <fvogelnew1@free.fr>
	Author:         Gregor Cramer <remarcg@gmx.net>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        10-Mar-2017
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tk,text widget
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tk-Branch:      revised_text
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes the replacement of the current implementation of the text
widget \(the "legacy" text widget\) by a revised implementation offering a large
number of advantages.

# Rationale

The Tk text widget has become increasingly complex as long as incremental
improvements and features have been added from time to time. In that process,
some known long-standing issues have become very difficult to tackle, for
instance the long line problem regarding lack of performance.

Gregor Cramer, in the process of using the text widget in one of his
applications, has analyzed the issues the current text widget is suffering
from, and has come up with a new implementation having the following main
advantages:

 * Big performance improvement

 * Better implementation of some existing features

 * A large number of new features

 * Numerous bug fixes

 * Very few incompatibilities with the legacy text widget

# Proposal

The proposal is to replace the legacy code with the new implementation.

The author of the revised implementation has written a well documented website
<http://scidb.sourceforge.net/tk/revised-text-widget.html> 
describing in details the issues with the legacy code, how he fixed these
issues, and what features he has changed or improved.

It was not deemed feasible nor necessary to copy/paste/reformat all the
information of the above website into the present TIP. Only the new features
and incompatibilities are highlighted here, as opposed to detailed rationales
about each change.

A version of the **text** man page, consistent with the changes and improvements proposed by the present TIP, can be seen at 
<http://scidb.sourceforge.net/tk/text.html>
This version of the man page is colorized, with blue meaning "changed", and green meaning "new", so that it is easier to spot what's different from the legacy text widget.

## Performance Improvements

Detailed performance comparison between legacy code and revised code can be
found at <http://scidb.sourceforge.net/tk/comparison.html>  but these are the
key points:

 * Long line problem, especially with many tags, is eliminated: in general
   only O\(N log N\) in revised version, was a higher order polynomial time in
   legacy code.

 * Display is faster: smoother scrolling, faster response time.
   <http://scidb.sourceforge.net/tk/display.html> 

 * Undo/redo is much faster: a completely new implementation has been worked
   out, directly working on the text segments.
   <http://scidb.sourceforge.net/tk/undo.html> 

## New Features

Detailed explanations and rationales for each of the items below can be found
at <http://scidb.sourceforge.net/tk/revised-text-widget.html> 

 * Undo/redo is handling tags \(this was requesteed in Issue \#1561991 and
   Issue \#1027741, embedded images, embedded windows, and also marks if option
   _-steadymarks_ is enabled

 * Additional widget state **readonly**

 * Hyphenation and full-justification support

	 > \* Support of hyphenation \(Issue \#1096580 is fixed\), with new helper
      functions **tk\_textinsert** and **tk\_textReplace**, and with new
      switches to _pathName_ **count**, _pathName_ **get**, and
      _pathName_ **search**

	 > \* Additional justification mode **full**

	 > \* Additional wrap mode **codepoint**, and new widget option
   **-useunibreak**. New subcommand _pathName_ **brks**

	 > \* Additional option **-lang** used to guide hyphenation engines.

 * Additional subcommands:

	 > \* _pathName_ **checksum**

	 > \* _pathName_ **clear**

	 > \* _pathName_ **edit altered**

	 > \* _pathName_ **edit info**

	 > \* _pathName_ **edit inspect**

	 > \* _pathName_ **edit irreversible**

	 > \* _pathName_ **edit recover**

	 > \* _pathName_ **inspect**

	 > \* _pathName_ **isclean**

	 > \* _pathName_ **isdead**

	 > \* _pathName_ **isempty**

	 > \* _pathName_ **lineno**

	 > \* _pathName_ **load**

	 > \* _pathName_ **mark compare**

	 > \* _pathName_ **mark exists**

	 > \* _pathName_ **mark generate**

	 > \* _pathName_ **tag clear**

	 > \* _pathName_ **tag findnext**

	 > \* _pathName_ **tag findprev**

	 > \* _pathName_ **tag getrange**

	 > \* _pathName_ **tag priority**

	 > \* _pathName_ **watch**

 * Additional tag attributes:

	 > \* **-eolcolor**

	 > \* **-hyphencolor**

	 > \* **-hyphenrules**

	 > \* **-inactivebackground**

	 > \* **-inactiveforeground**

	 > \* **-inactiveselectbackground**

	 > \* **-inactiveselectforeground**

	 > \* **-indentbackground**

	 > \* **-undo**

 * Additional widget options:

	 > \* **-endindex**

	 > \* **-eolchar**

	 > \* **-eolcolor**

	 > \* **-eotchar**

	 > \* **-eotcolor**

	 > \* **-hyphencolor**

	 > \* **-hyphenrules**

	 > \* **-hyphens**

	 > \* **-inactiveselectforeground**

	 > \* **-insertforeground**

	 > \* **-maxredo**

	 > \* **-maxundosize**

	 > \* **-responsiveness**

	 > \* **-showendofline**

	 > \* **-showendoftext**

	 > \* **-showinsertforeground**

	 > \* **-spacemode**

	 > \* **-startindex**

	 > \* **-steadymarks**

	 > \* **-synctime**

	 > \* **-tagging**

 * Extensions to the syntax for indices:

	 > \* new specifier **begin**

	 > \* new syntax _tag_.**current.first**, _tag_.**current.last**

	 > \* new syntax **@first,last**

 * Additional features of existing subcommands:

	 > \* Additional option **-marks** for _pathName_ **delete** command

	 > \* Additional optional parameter _direction_ for _pathName_ **mark set** sub-command

	 > \* New virtual event **\<\<Altered\>\>** to support new sub-command
     _pathName_ **edit altered**

	 > \* Extensions to commands _pathName_ **edit reset** and _pathName_
     **edit separator**

 * Extended command _pathName_ **tag names**

 * Additional switch for _pathName_ **dump**

 * Additional option **-extents** for _pathName_ **bbox**
     and _pathName_ **dlineinfo**

 * Additional option **-discardspecial** for _pathName_ **mark names**, _pathName_ **mark next**, and _pathName_ **mark previous**.

 * Additional optional parameter _pattern_ for _pathName_ **mark names**, _pathName_ **mark next**, and _pathName_ **mark previous**.

 * New helper commands:

	 > \* **tk\_mergeRange**

	 > \* **tk\_textInsert**

	 > \* **tk\_textReplace**

	 > \* **tk\_textRebindMouseWheel**

 * Additional option **-owner** for embedded window

 * Additional option **-tags** for embedded images and embedded windows

## Bug Fixes

 * Bug fixed in TkTextGetIndex

 * Bug fixed in TkTextGetIndexFromObj

 * Bug fixed in DeleteIndexRange \(note that this bugfix implies that deletion at the end of the text handles the last newline now differently - slight incompatibility with the legacy text widget\)

 * Bug fixed in TkTextDeleteTag/TagBindEvent

 * Problems fixed with **-startline**/**-endline**

 * Problems fixed with tag event handling

 * Several bug fixes with **undo**

 * **Edit modified** confusing results fixed with new command
   **edit altered**

 * Severe problems with command **sync** fixed

 * Invalid changes in disabled widget are marked as deprecated

 * Inaccurate wrapping algorithm fixed

 * Bugs in display logic fixed

 * Insert cursor is now fully visible in all conditions

 * Trimming spaces: Issue \#1082213 (and \#1754051) are invalid, the fix put
   in core-8-6-branch and trunk \(8.7\) have been reverted. There is now
   the new option **-spacemode** that can be set to **trim**\, however
   none of the available values for **-spacemode** in the revised code
   provide a display exactly identical to 8.6 in all cases

 * Issues with display of selections fixed

 * **Update** is no longer wasting the processor time since superfluous
   update computations are not done anymore

 * Bugs in context drawing support \(OS X\) fixed

 * Bugs fixed in tkUnixRFont.c

 * Several bug fixes related to handling/positioning of the insertion cursor

Details on each of these bugs can be found in the "Bugs/Issues in Original
Implementation" section at
<http://scidb.sourceforge.net/tk/revised-text-widget.html>

## Incompatibilities with Legacy Version

Based on the author's website, the following incompatibilities are currently
known:

 * [[449]](449.md) \(undo/redo to Return Range of Characters\) was not adapted into the
   revised implementation, because Issue \#1217222 - the basis for [[449]](449.md) -
   is now featured by:

	 > 1. The new undo implementation, because also the tag associations will be
      restored, and

	 > 2. The powerful **watch** command, which also provides the affected
      ranges \(with constant runtime behavior\).

	 > Moreover, the **tk\_mergeRange** function convenience function has been
   implemented in the revised version.

 * The special selection tag **sel** can no longer be elided \(would be
   useless anyway\).

 * Tag options \(introduced in 8.6.6\) -overstrikefg and -underlinefg were
   renamed to **-overstrikecolor** and **-underlinecolor**

 * The new index syntax **@first,last** is incompatible with the legacy
   version but it is not expected that any existing application will break,
   certainly nobody is using such a form for the name of a mark or image

 * The default value of 50 ms for the new **-responsiveness** option is
   incompatible to prior releases, but it shouldn't matter here, because
   nobody wants flickering, and nobody is using special tricks with a short
   mouse hovering while the widget is scrolling. Setting the responsiveness to zero restores the old
   behavior of the text widget.

 * **\<\<UndoStack\>\>** is generated with any change on the undo stack, not only when
   the undo stack or the redo stack becomes empty or non-empty

 * **-startline**/**-endline** behavior was subtly changed in some corner cases

 * In revised implementation "\+N chars" and "-N chars" refer to characters,
   and no longer to indices \(which was the case in legacy code for backwards
   compatibility reasons\).

 * No value of the **-spacemode** option provides display of the text completely
   identical to legacy code (8.6 and above) in all situations. This includes the
   default "none".

## Deprecated Commands and Options

 * Tag options \(introduced in 8.6.6\) **-overstrikefg** and
   **-underlinefg** were renamed to -overstrikecolor and -underlinecolor

 * edit **undodepth**\|**redodepth**\|**canundo**\|**canredo** are
   replaced by more general **edit info**

 * Widget options **-startline**/**-endline**' are replaced by
   -startindex/-endindex

## Drawbacks

 * The increase in memory usage is not very high \(but a bit high\), and despite
   this, in many cases, especially if many tags are used, and/or undo is
   enabled, the revised version is even decreasing the memory usage.

Detailed memory comparison between legacy code and revised code can be found
at <http://scidb.sourceforge.net/tk/comparison.html>

## Known Issues in the Revised Implementation

Based on the author's website, currently only these issues are known: 

 * The code for the implementation has increased by more than 100%, and about
   70% of the old code has been changed. The revised implementation needs more
   testing, the text widget is very complex, and bugs are expected. And a few
   additions are not yet well tested.

 * Function **tk\_textCopy** is copying hidden \(elided\) text. This seems to
   be unexpected, but it's the behavior of the original implementation.
   Probably this is a bug and should be corrected.

 * Adding/deleting tags covering a large range of text is still quite time
   consuming.

 * The display line with the insert cursor is redrawn each time the cursor
   blinks, which causes a steady stream of graphics traffic. It would be
   desirable if the cursor update will be performed with a specialized and
   efficient redraw function.

 * If option **-spacemode** is set to trim, then **get -displaychars**
   should probably return trimmed spaces. Currently this command is not
   trimming spaces, so the result may not coincide with the visible text.

 * The **search -regexp** sub-command is still not yet fully implemented,
   see Tk documentation.

 * The revised widget still ignores modifying commands if state is
   not normal; this behavior is unreasonable, but conforms to the original
   version.

 * Currently the special index specifier **begin** has the lowest
   precedence, although it should have the same precedence as the special
   index special **end** \(see section INDICES\). In a future release this
   should be corrected.  The current behavior is a workaround, avoiding that
   existing applications will break with the introduction of **begin**.

 * The implementation still contains some TODO's of minor issues. 

Also, the following should be noted:

 * With the revised version there are failing tests on all platforms, they
   need to be fixed \(by fixing the expected result in the test, or by fixing
   the text widget code\).

 * More tests should be written to exercise the new or changed features.

 * The OS X case should be more tested on a real Mac, because it's the only
   platform using context drawing.

## Miscellaneous

 * No function signature pertaining to a public interface was changed. Also
   public data structures haven't been touched.

 * All recent new features brought in trunk in the legacy version have their
   counterpart in the revised version, have been improved in performance and
   have no known drawbacks. Minor incompatibilities are however identified
   here and there.

# Target Release

Given the amount of changes, also because of our usual precautions regarding
backwards compatibility, and despite the very high quality of the code and the
fact it passes \(almost all\) the previously existing test suite, it is deemed
reasonable to target Tcl/Tk 8.7 \(or 9.0\), but neither the 8.6 nor the 8.5
streams of releases, which will continue to implement the legacy text widget
code.

Support of versions back to 8.5 is currently included in the revised code, but
will be removed \(because it's useless for use in trunk only\) at the time the
new code will get merged into trunk.

# Implementation

Implementation of the revised text widget code has been placed in branch
<http://core.tcl.tk/tk/timeline?r=revised_text>  of the fossil repository.

This implementation compiles on Linux, Windows, and OS X. It respects the
standards of Tk \(C99 standard, and also the Tcl source code formatting
described in [[247]](247.md)\).

The man page for the text widget has been contributed by jima and is included
in the revised\_text branch.

The expected results of many tests were adjusted to take into account that the
revised implementation is better optimizing, so some trace results of display
line computation are different. Other adjustments were required because of bug
fixes.

# Open Questions

 * tkTextUndo.c implements a specialized undo/redo, not using the legacy
   tkUndo.c. Reasons for this are stated at the top of tkTextUndo.c. It is
   interesting to note that, in the revised\_text branch, tkUndo.c is not even
   compiled anymore, except on Linux \(for no apparent reason\). This is dead
   code waiting for use case by a widget. At least, compilation on Linux
   should be removed, but couldn't we even rename tkTextUndo.c to tkUndo.c and
   forget about the old implementation? tkTextUndo.c is also a shareable
   implementation \(in the spirit of [[104]](104.md)\).

 * Actual removal of deprecated features or keep them \(some are marked as
   deprecated, but actually still supported\)?

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

The author of the revised text widget code has explicitly placed his code of
the text widget under the same license as Tcl.

