# TIP 471: Add [info linkedname] Introspection Command
	Author:         Mathieu Lafon <mlafon@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Created:        05-May-2017
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Vote:		Pending
	Post-History:
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to improve link variable introspection by providing a new
**info linkedname** command.

# Rationale

This TIP is related to discussions about [[457]](457.md) and the **-upvar** extended
argument specifier. Adding an intropsection command to get the name of the
variable linked to is more Tcl-ish than automatically adding a local variable
with the linked name.  The proposed command is not restricted to [[457]](457.md) usage
as this can also be used for a link variable created by other means, using the
**upvar** command for example.

# Specification of the Proposed Change

There should be a new subcommand of **info** created with the following syntax:

 > **info linkedname** _varname_

The _varname_ should be the name of a variable that has been linked to
another variable \(e.g., with **upvar**, **global**, **variable** or
**namespace upvar**\), and the result of the command will be the name of the
variable linked to.

# Reference Implementation

The reference implementation is available in the info-linkedname
<http://core.tcl.tk/tcl/timeline?r=info-linkedname>  branch.

The code is licensed under the BSD license.

## Implementation Notes

Depending on the linked variable, the name is found using different methods:

 * The name of a variable present in a hash table \(globals, local variables
   created at runtime, ...\) is retrieved using the hash key;

 * The name of an array element is built using the name of the array and the
   index name, retrieved using the hash key. A new field is added to the
   TclVarHashTable sructure to access the related array variable from the
   array element;

 * The name of a compiled local variable is searched in current or upper call
   frames.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

