# TIP 474: Treat the mouse wheel events in a uniform way
	Author:	Arjen Markus (arjen.markus895@gmail.com)
	State:	Draft
	Type:	Project
	Vote:	Pending
	Created:	25-Aug-2017
	Post-history:	PM
	Tcl-Version:	8.6
	Keywords:	Tk, events
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to treat the mouse wheel events on all platforms in a
similar way. Currently, a program running on Windows should bind to
"MouseWheel" events, whereas a program running on Linux should bind to
"ButtonPress-4" and "ButtonPress-5" commands. This makes it somewhat
awkward to support both types of platforms.


# Rationale

Tk provides a means to define user-interfaces using code that is almost
perfectly independent of the platform that the program should run on. It
therefore makes sens that the treatment of user actions, such as mouse
clicks and the use of the mouse wheel should be independent of the
platform as well. Currently, however, "Windows-type" and OSX platforms
support the "MouseWheel" event, whereas for "Linux-type" platforms the
program should bind to "ButtonPress-4" and "ButtonPress-5"  events.
This is in contrast to almost all other events and event bindings.

The documentation in its present form only describes the "MouseWheel"
form.


# Current behaviour

The code fragment below illustrates the behaviour: run it under various
platforms and use the mouse wheel in the canvas window to see which
bindings fired.

    pack [canvas .c]
    
    catch {console show}
    
    bind .c <ButtonPress> [list puts "ButtonPress %W %b"]
    bind .c <Shift-ButtonPress> [list puts "Shift-ButtonPress %W %b"]
    bind .c <Control-ButtonPress> [list puts "Control-ButtonPress %W %b"]
    bind .c <MouseWheel> [list puts "MouseWheel %W %D"]
    bind .c <Shift-MouseWheel> [list puts "Shift-MouseWheel %W %D"]
    bind .c <Control-MouseWheel> [list puts "Control-MouseWheel %W %D"]


# Specification

This TIP proposes to extend the bindings for the mouse wheel in such a
way that it does not matter which platform the program runs on. To keep
the incompatibility due to this change to a minimum, both types of
bindings might hold on both types of events:

    bind widget "ButtonPress-4" cmd
    bind widget "MouseWheel" cmd

\(One caveat is in the direction of the mouse wheel - using the first,
one selects the direction via the button number: 4 for "up" and 5 for
"down", whereas in the second form the %D substitution has to be used.\)

It is simpler, however, to translate the "Button 4" and "Button 5"
events to equivalent "Mousewheel" events. This can be introduced for
Tcl/Tk 8.7. The modifiers "Control" and "Shift" should be supported
analogously.

As an example \(thanks to Jan Nijtmans for this\), the bindings for the
text widget would look like this:

    bind Text <MouseWheel> {
        %W yview scroll %D pixels
    }
    bind Text <Option-MouseWheel> {
        %W yview scroll %D pixels
    }
    bind Text <Shift-MouseWheel> {
        %W xview scroll %D pixels
    }
    bind Text <Shift-Option-MouseWheel> {
        %W xview scroll %D pixels
    }

with the %D substitution giving the right amount of pixels.

# Considerations regarding the incompatibility

An application that currently uses the "ButtonPress-4/5" events needs
to be changed to use the "MouseWheel" events regardless of platform.

If the application needs to support Tcl/Tk 8.6, an extra check is
required to decide which events to listen to: a Linux-like platform
together with Tk 8.6, instead of simply a Linux-like platform.

This seems a minor inconvenience for gaining further
platform-independence.

# Reference Implementation

In tk branch tip474-uniform-mouse-wheel.

# Copyright

This document is placed in public domain.

