# TIP 474: Treat the mouse wheel events in a uniform way
	Author:	Arjen Markus <arjen.markus895@gmail.com>
	Author:	Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:	Draft
	Type:	Project
	Vote:	In progress
	Created:	25-Aug-2017
	Post-history:	PM
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Keywords:	Tk, events
	Tk-Branch:	tip474
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to treat the mouse wheel events on all platforms in
the same way. Currently, a program running on Windows binds to
"MouseWheel" events, whereas a program running on Linux binds to
"ButtonPress-4" and "ButtonPress-5" commands. This makes it somewhat
awkward to support both types of platforms having identical behaviour.


# Rationale

Tk provides a means to define user-interfaces using code that is almost
perfectly independent of the platform that the program should run on. It
therefore makes sense that the treatment of user actions, such as mouse
clicks and the use of the mouse wheel should be independent of the
platform as well. Currently, however, "Windows-type" and OSX platforms
support the "MouseWheel" event, whereas for "Linux-type" platforms the
program binds to "ButtonPress-4" and "ButtonPress-5"  events.
This is in contrast to almost all other events and event bindings.

The documentation in its present form only describes the "MouseWheel"
form.


# Current behaviour

The code fragment below illustrates the behaviour: run it under various
platforms and use the mouse wheel in the canvas window to see which
bindings fired.

    pack [canvas .c]

    catch {console show}

    bind .c <Button> [list puts "Button %W %b"]
    bind .c <Shift-Button> [list puts "Shift-Button %W %b"]
    bind .c <Control-Button> [list puts "Control-Button %W %b"]
    bind .c <MouseWheel> [list puts "MouseWheel %W %D"]
    bind .c <Shift-MouseWheel> [list puts "Shift-MouseWheel %W %D"]
    bind .c <Control-MouseWheel> [list puts "Control-MouseWheel %W %D"]


# Specification

This TIP proposes to extend the bindings for the mouse wheel in such a
way that it does not matter which platform the program runs on. On
X11, the "Button 4" up to "Button 7" events will be translated internally
to equivalent "MouseWheel" events. The modifiers "Option" and "Shift"
will be supported analogously.

The "xview scroll" and "yview scroll" commands are modified to accept
floats in stead of integers. This doesn't mean that we can scroll
for 0.5 units or pages now, the numbers are rounded up when positive
and rounded down when negative. So ".w yview scroll -0.1 units" will
have the same effect as ".w yview scroll -1 units". This way, the
bindings don't have to do this special rounding any more, as they are
doing now.

A new helper function `tk::MouseWheel` is implemented. The
disadvantage of the current bindings is that the `expr` expression
needs to be parsed for every mouse move. The `tk::MouseWheel`
function contains the same expression, but is compiled only once.
So, this is purely an optimization. With that, the text widget bindings
become:

    bind Text <MouseWheel> {
        tk::MouseWheel %W y %D -3.0 pixels
    }
    bind Text <Option-MouseWheel> {
        tk::MouseWheel %W y %D -0.3 pixels
    }
    bind Text <Shift-MouseWheel> {
        tk::MouseWheel %W x %D -3.0 pixels
    }
    bind Text <Shift-Option-MouseWheel> {
        tk::MouseWheel %W x %D -0.3 pixels
    }

On all platforms, button 1 will be the left mouse button,
button 2 the middle mouse button and button 3 the right
mouse button. In Tk 8.6 and earlier, MacOS always defined
buttons 2 and 3 differently. In Tk 8.7, Tk will do the
swapping for us.

# Considerations regarding the incompatibility

The physical buttons 4 up to 9 on Windows or MacOS, will be
translated to X11 buttons 8 up to 13. From the script level
nothing changes: The buttons still can be accessed from
scripts as being buttons 4 up to 9. This means that X11
buttons 4 to 7 are not accessible through script any more,
the only way to access those are through the translated
MouseWheel events. On X11, buttons 4 up to 9 in scripts
will handle the X11 buttons numbered 8 up to 13.

On macOS, the scaling for MouseWheel buttons has always
been different from those on Windows, with a factor of 120.
This means that applications assuming Tk 8.6 <MouseWheel>
events will need to be modified to the new behaviour,
otherwise the screen movements will be far too much.
On Windows, everything works as before, no incompatibility
there. Many applications already define the <MouseWheel>
binding on X11, even though in Tk 8.6 they are not
used. Such applications will work on X11 in Tk 8.7 the
same as in Tk 8.6

If the application needs to support Tcl/Tk 8.6, an extra
check is required to decide which events to listen to.
An example can be found in the "cscroll" demo.

This seems a minor inconvenience for gaining further
platform-independence.

# Reference Implementation

In tk branch tip474.

# Copyright

This document is placed in public domain.

