# TIP 476: Scan/Printf format consistency
	Author: Jan Nijtmans (jan.nijtmans@gmail.com)
	State: Final
	Type: Project
	Vote: Done
	Created: 27-Sep-2017
	Post-history: PM
	Tcl-Version: 8.7
	Keywords: scan, printf
	Tcl-Branch: z_modifier
-----

# Abstract

The Scan/Printf format handlers are originally derived from the
C-equivalent `scan()` and `printf()` functions. Since ISO C99 there is
the `inttypes.h` header file, which defines useful macros. But since
the Tcl implementation was older than that, those macros don't
play well together with Tcl. This TIP proposes a solution for that.

In addition, this TIP proposes to adapt the `%#o` modifier such that
it produces the "0o" prefix in stead of "o". This is a small step in the
direction of phasing out octal (TIP #114). Finally this TIP modifies
the `%#d` modifier, such that it only produces a "0d" prefix if that
is needed for correct interpretation of the number when parsing it.

# Rationale

For an example program containing all situations mentioned here,
see [main.c](../attach/476/main.c)

First of all, when compiling the example program on 64-bit linux
(with `-DTCL_WIDE_INT_IS_LONG=1`), `gcc` outputs 5 warnings, 4 of them
are unnecessary:

<pre>
main.c: In function 'main':
main.c:61:9: warning: format '%lu' expects argument of type 'long unsigned int', but argument 2 has type 'long long unsigned int' [-Wformat=]
  printf("%" TCL_LL_MODIFIER "u\n", ll);
         ^~~
main.c:62:22: warning: format '%lu' expects argument of type 'long unsigned int', but argument 2 has type 'long long unsigned int' [-Wformat=]
  obj = Tcl_ObjPrintf("%" TCL_LL_MODIFIER "u", ll);
                      ^~~
main.c:64:13: warning: format '%llu' expects argument of type 'long long unsigned int', but argument 2 has type 'Tcl_WideUInt {aka long unsigned int}' [-Wformat=]
  printf("%llu\n", w);
             ^
main.c:65:26: warning: format '%llu' expects argument of type 'long long unsigned int', but argument 2 has type 'Tcl_WideUInt {aka long unsigned int}' [-Wformat=]
  obj = Tcl_ObjPrintf("%llu", w);
                          ^
main.c:99:25: warning: format '%Ld' expects argument of type 'long long int', but argument 2 has type 'mp_int * {aka struct mp_int *}' [-Wformat=]
  obj = Tcl_ObjPrintf("%Ld", &mp);
                         ^~~
</pre>

The last warning arises because the C printf formatter doesn't handle the `mp_int` types, this warning can be safely ignored.

The other 4 warnings arise because `Tcl_WideInt` is defined as being the same as `long` on this sytem. Making it the same as `long long` fully eliminates those warnings.

# Specification

This TIP proposes serveral things:

   *   Whenever possible, typedef `Tcl_WideInt` to be equal to `long long`, even
       on platforms where long has the same size as `long long`.

   *   Document the already existing `TCL_LL_MODIFIER` macro to be equivalent
       to "ll" whenever possible. This is used already to format/scan variables
       of type `Tcl_WideInt`/`Tcl_WideUInt`, but now it can be used also for
       variables of type `long long` or `__int64` (Windows). The obligation to
       use `Tcl_WideInt`/`Tcl_WideUInt` in extensions (enforced by compiler
       warnings) is now gone: "long long" can always be used instead.

   *   Add a new `TCL_Z_MODIFIER` macro to be equivalent to "z" whenever possible.
       This can be used to format/scan variables of type `size_t` or `ptrdiff_t`.
       If your compiler is ISO C99-compatible, you can use "z" resp "t" instead.

   *   Add the "a" and "A" type fields, for formatting floats in hex. Conforming
       to ISO C99, except that the "p" in the output is always lowercase. Since
       hex float format is not a valid Tcl number representation, those type
       fields will _not_ be added to Tcl's "scan" command.

   *   Allow macro's from `<inttypes.h>`, such as `PRId32` and `PRId64`, to be used in
       `Tcl_ObjPrintf()`. All that is needed in Tcl is making the format characters
       mean _exactly_ the same as they do in C. See: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Printf_format_string>
       Missing were the "t", "z" and "j" modifier (unknown to MSVC as well), and "q"
       for BSD platforms. For windows, "I", "I32" and "I64" are needed. With those
       additions, the Tcl handling of the `<inttypes.h>` macros is fully ISO C99
       compatible, even on platforms which don't have an ISO C99
       conformant printf.

   *   No longer let the "%llu" format generate an error if the formatted number
       is positive. This affects the Tcl "scan" command as well.

   *   Add a new "L" length modifier. When used in combination with "f" or "g",
       it allows long doubles to be formatted. Since Tcl doesn't handle long doubles
       internally, the value is converted to a normal double first.
       For integers, "L" indicates that the value to be formatted is of type `mp_int`,
       the function expect a pointer to it as argument. Since standard C printf
       format handles don't handle `mp_int` types, this will result in a gcc warning,
       which can be safely ignored.

   *   Adapt the `%#x` and `%#X` modifiers, such that the "x" in the output is always lowercase.
       If the formatted number is `0`, no "0x" prefix is produced.

   *   Adapt the `%#o` modifier to use "0o" as octal prefix in stead of "0".
       This prefix is only produced when the formatted number is not 0,
       i.e. when there is possible confusion with a decimal number.

   *   Adapt the `%#d` modifier. The prefix "0d" is only produced when there is
       a width field and the formatted number is not `0`, i.e. when there is
       possible confusion with an octal number. Since in Tcl 9.0 octal numbers
       with "0" prefix will be gone, "#" will not produce the decimal prefix any more.

   *   Add a `%p` modifier (but not to "scan"), which is shorthand for `0x%zx`.
       So it outputs the integer in hexadecimal form with "0x" prefix (since Tcl doesn't know
       about pointers). In `Tcl_ObjPrintf()` this can be used to format pointers without first
       casting it to `ptrdiff_t` or `size_t`, as does the equivalent C printf `%p` modifier.

# Considerations regarding the incompatibility

This change is almost fully upwards compatible. As long as Tcl extensions use the
`Tcl_WideInt`/`Tcl_WideUInt` data types (in stead of `long long` or `__int64`),
everything works as before.

When using the "#" modifier, "format" doesn't produce the exact same output as Tcl 8.6
any more, but only rarely used corner cases are affected. As the "main.c"
example shows, the result is more similar to ISO C99 than before. Here is a summary
of the changes, and the 'compatible' format string if you want the 8.6 behavior
(most likely you are using that already):

|  format_string |   value    |    8.6        | 8.7          |  compatible
|  ---           |   ---      |    ---        | ---          |  ---
|    "%#o"       |     15     |     017       |   0o17       |    "0%o"
|    "%#0d"      |     15     |     15        |   0d15       |    "%0d"
|    "%#X"       |     15     |     0XF       |   0xF        |    "0X%X"

# Reference Implementation

<https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?r=z_modifier>

# Copyright

This document is placed in public domain.
