# TIP 482: Record Tk demo directory information
	Author:         Stuart Cassoff <stwo@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Voting
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           In progress
	Created:        03-Nov-2017
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tk, demos, configuration
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----
# Abstract

The Tk demos can be installed anywhere but this location is not recorded anywhere.
This TIP proposes recording the demo directory location.

# Rationale

The Tk demos can be installed in a non-default directory
by overriding the Makefile variable `DEMO_INSTALL_DIR` at install-time.
Since this information isn't recorded anywhere
there is no practical way for an external entity
to determine the demo install directory.

# Proposal

* Add an overridable configure-time variable `DEMO_DIR`
that by default contains the current default demo install directory
and have this propagate through the build system.

* Record the configured demo directory in tkConfig.sh, tk.pc and `::tk::pkgconfig`.

# Platform Considerations

* Unix, MacOSX
 * This TIP works as described.
* Windows
 * This TIP works as described however saved configuration information about directories
   is generally less useful on Windows because Tk is almost never installed into the same
   directories that are recorded in the pre-built files.

# Current Uncertainties as of 2017/11/21:
* The function GetWidgetDemoPath in macosx/tkMacOSXMenus.c uses a different method
  to retrieve the value of the widget demo path. Is this ok?
* Only tested on Unix.

# Reference Implementation

The reference implementation is available in the tk-stu-pkg branch. <http://core.tcl.tk/tk/timeline?r=tk-stu-pkg>

The code is licensed under the same license as Tk.

# See Also

TIP #483 [[483]](483.md): Improved TIP #59 implementation for Tk.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
