# TIP 484: Merge 'int' and 'wideInt' Obj-type to a single 'int'
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        06-Nov-2017
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       Tcl
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----
# Abstract

The 'wideInt' type was invented for Tcl because the 'int' type (which was
actually 'long') was not sufficient to store numbers larger than [+-]2**31.
This TIP proposes to merge the 'int' and the 'wideInt' Obj-types such that
'int' does all internal calculations using Tcl_WideInt in stead of long.

# Rationale

For linux64, the 'wideInt' type doesn't give any advantage, it is #ifdef'd out
in the code. For Windows 64, since 'long' is the same as 'int', it would be
an advantage to use __int64 for all internal number processing. Since __int64
calculations are just as efficient as int/long calculations on most (64-bit and
32-bit) processors, it would save all kinds of range checks in the Tcl code.
That's the main gain of this TIP.

Finally, for 32-bit systems, getting rid of 'wideInt' could give a small
disadvantage on systems which split 64-bit calculations in terms of 32-bit
calculations. There 32-bit calculations could become slightly slower.

Since the gain for 64-bit platforms (mainly Win64) is expected to be more
than the possible loss on some 32-bit system, I still propose to follow this road.

Another advantage of this change is maintainability of number handling.
Currently the C code contains a lot of #ifdef's which check whether
sizeof(long) is the same a sizeof(wideint). Most of those checks can
be removed, so the number handling becomes almost identical on all platforms
supported by Tcl.

# Proposal

Merge 'int' and 'wideInt' Obj-type to a single 'int'. Make the following changes:

* Change the signature of the internal function `TclFormatInt` to
    `int TclFormatInt(char *buffer, Tcl_WideInt n)`
  so it can handle the full range of wide integers.

* Modify the internal `TclGetNumberFromObj` function to always return
  `TCL_NUMBER_WIDE` in stead of `TCL_NUMBER_LONG`. This indicates that
  the internalRep.wideValue contains the actual internal representation
  of numbers. `TCL_NUMBER_LONG` is not used anymore, except in the
  bytecode implementation for `string is integer` and `string is wideinteger`.
  On script level this change is not detectable.

* Modify the 'int' type to store its internal representation in
    internalRep.wideValue in stead of internalRep.longValue. This means
  that the 'int' type gains the full functionality of 'wideInt' on
  all platforms. This makes all 'wideInt' special code redundant,
  so it can full be removed from the Tcl code base.

* On 32-bit systems, use 'wideInt' in stead of 'int', this makes it more
  clear to extensions that the internal implementation changed.

# Compatibility

On systems where sizeof(int) == sizeof(long), there are no compatibility
issues, since those systems don't have the 'wideInt' type now (this code
is #ifdef'ed out). On other systems:

* The function call `Tcl_GetObjType("int")` will return NULL, where it
  returned non-NULL before.

* The function call `Tcl_GetObjType("wideInt")` will return non-NULL, where it
  returned NULL before.

In Tcl 9.0, "wideInt" (which is actually the new implementation of "int")
will be renamed to "int", and both `Tcl_GetObjType("int")`
and `Tcl_GetObjType("wideInt")` will return NULL;

No test-cases are modified in the 'no-wideint' branch, all current
test-cases continue to pass. This shows that separating the 'int'
and the 'wideInt' implementation is nowhere required to let
Tcl number handling function the way it functions now. At the
script level, the change is invisible.

# Reference Implementation

An implementation of this TIP can be found in the [no-wideint](https://core.tcl.tk/tcl/timeline?r=no-wideint) branch.

The code is licensed under the same license as Tcl.

# Caveats

* Extensions which assume that Tcl_GetObjType("int") returns non-NULL will no longer
  work with 64-bit Tcl 8.7 (but it will still work on 32-bit Tcl 8.7). Example:
  Tk <= 8.6.8 (this is corrected in Tk 8.6.9). No external code may make assumptions
  of implementation details for 'int'/'wideInt'. There are a few extensions which assume
  that `Tcl_GetObjType("int")` always return non-NULL. It's easy
  to fix that. If any packages maintainers need help doing that, just ask.
  
  Other examples (the only 3 I found):
  
  * tbcload (cmdRead.c)
  * tclxml (tclxslt-libxslt.c)
  * VecTcl (nacomplex.c, vectcl.c, vectcl.tcl.c)

# Rejected Alternatives

* It would have been possible to keep the objType to be named "int" on all platforms.
  That would mean that 32-bit extensions which access internalRep.longValue directly
  might silently fail without any warning.

* Another possibility is just remove the registration of the "int"/"wideInt" objType
  altogether. This would mean that all extensions using Tcl_GetObjType("int") will start
  failing during start-up immediately. This will be done for Tcl 9.0, but would be too early for 8.7.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
