# TIP 485: Remove Deprecated API
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        08-Nov-2017
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    9.0
-----

# Abstract

The "case" command, and the "read\|puts ... nonewline" construct are replaced
by better commands long ago (resp. "switch" and "read\|puts -nonewline ..."),
but the old forms were never actually removed from the Tcl code base. They still
work. See also [bug #3151675](https://core.tcl.tk/tcl/tktview/3151675).
For Tcl 9.0 it is finally time to actually remove it.

In addition, there are a number of C API's which have better successors
by now. Finally, there are a few C routines and other macros which were
never been properly documented before, like `CONST`, or macros needed for
supporting deprecated C features, like `_ANSI_ARGS_` and `TCL_VARARGS`.
This TIP proposes to finally remove all of those in Tcl 9.0, and mark
them as deprecated in Tcl 8.7.

# Rationale

The "case" command is superseded by the "switch" command.

The "read \<chan\> nonewline" construct is superseded by "read -nonewline \<chan\>".

The "puts \<chan\> \<line\> nonewline" construct is superseded by "read -nonewline \<chan\> \<line\>".

The following C routines -- mostly macros -- like the "case" command
have never been part of the documented interface of Tcl 8, and should
be removed:

   * `Tcl_DStringTrunc`
   * `Tcl_Ckalloc`
   * `Tcl_Ckfree`
   * `Tcl_Ckrealloc`
   * `Tcl_Return`
   * `Tcl_TildeSubst`
   * `panic`

The following C macros don't serve any purpose any more, they will be removed in Tcl 9.0:

   * `CONST84_RETURN` (just use `const`)
   * `CONST84` (just use `const`)
   * `CONST` (just use `const`)
   * `TCL_VARARGS` (just use `...`)
   * `TCL_VARARGS_DEF` (just use `...`)
   * `TCL_VARARGS_START` (just use `va_start()`)
   * `_ANSI_ARGS_` (just use `(` and `)`)
   * `VOID`, `CHAR`, `SHORT`, `LONG` (windows-only, just use lower-case variant)
   * `TCL_PARSE_PART1` (flag for variable-related functions, has no effect any more)
   * `__WIN32__`, `WIN32` (just use `_WIN32`)

Minor note: The macro `CONST86` is still kept, as this can be used
for extensions wanting to keep compatibility with Tcl 8.5. This macro
will become DEPRECATED in Tcl 9.0, but will not be removed yet.

The function `Tcl_Backslash` is superseded by `Tcl_UtfBackslash`

   * The routine `Tcl_Backslash` returns a single-byte char.
     It cannot return all possible character values 
     produced in Tcl backslash sequences.  Moving to the successor
     routine fixes bugs.

The function `Tcl_GetDefaultEncodingDir` is superseded by `Tcl_GetEncodingSearchPath`

The function `Tcl_SetDefaultEncodingDir` is superseded by `Tcl_SetEncodingSearchPath`

The function `Tcl_EvalTokens` is superseded by `Tcl_EvalTokensStandard`

   * The routine `Tcl_EvalTokens` is incapable of reporting back to
     the caller the return code produced by evaluation.  Moving to the
     successor routine fixes bugs inherent in not distinguishing different
     return codes.

Finally, the functions `Tcl_CreateMathFunc`, `Tcl_GetMathFuncInfo` and `Tcl_ListMathFuncs`
are superseded by [TIP #232](232.md)

# Proposed Change

If Tcl 8.7 is compiled with the flag `-DTCL_NO_DEPRECATED`, the "case" command,
the "read \<chan\> nonewline", and the "puts \<chan\> \<line\> nonewline"
constructs will be disabled. In Tcl 9.0 all related
code will actually be removed from the Tcl code base. 

The following API's are declared deprecated in Tcl 8.7 and will be
fully removed in Tcl 9.0. If Tcl 8.7 is compiled with the flag `-DTCL_NO_DEPRECATED`,
all deprecated API is disabled, by making those entries `MODULE_SCOPE`, and
putting 0 in the corresponding stub entries.  This can be used by extensions
to see whether they are compatible with the next major Tcl release or not.
Those functions are already removed in the "novem" branch:

 * `Tcl_Backslash`

 * `Tcl_GetDefaultEncodingDir`

 * `Tcl_SetDefaultEncodingDir`

 * `Tcl_EvalTokens`

 * `Tcl_CreateMathFunc`

 * `Tcl_GetMathFuncInfo`

 * `Tcl_ListMathFuncs`

An implementation of this TIP can be found in the [tip-485](https://core.tcl.tk/tcl/timeline?r=tip-485) branch.
This branch is based on "core-8-branch" (Tcl 8.7), but can be trivially merged forward to trunk (Tcl 9.0).

# Rejected Alternatives

Originally, `Tcl_EvalFile` was a candidate for removal as well.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
