# TIP 487: Stop support for Pre-XP Windows 
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Voting
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           In progress
	Created:        20-Nov-2017
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

Windows CE will be end-of-life in 2018, june 9 (See:
[here](http://rfsmart.com/blog/hardware-tip-operating-systems-end-of-life). This is
still about half a year away, but it seems counter-productive to support Pre-XP Windows
for a new minor Tcl release: It's unlikely that any Pre-XP Windows user would like
to spend effort to upgrade Tcl from 8.6 to 8.7 on such a device. Tcl 8.6.8 and later
will continue to support older Windows releases, this TIP only proposes to stop
support for Tcl 8.7 and later.

# Proposed Change

Although the abstract says it all, the main change in Tcl is that it won't
startup anymore when `TclWinGetPlatformId()` returns something else than
`VER_PLATFORM_WIN32_NT` (2). This allows `TclWinGetPlatformId()` to be
implemented as a macro (but the stub entry will be kept for all future 8.x
releases). In Tcl 9.0, `TclWinGetPlatformId()` will be removed completely.

For Tk 8.7, the same will be done: `TkWinGetPlatformId()` will be
implemented as a macro, always returning `VER_PLATFORM_WIN32_NT` (2).
In Tk 9.0, `TkWinGetPlatformId()` will be removed completely. It turns
out that Tk benefits a lot more from removal of pre-XP parts: Mainly
the XP theme engine (part of ttk), has a lot of runtime checks making
it work on pre-XP machines. All of those runtime checks can be removed.
This means that Tk 8.7 will no longer compile and run when uxtheme.dll
is not available on your system. Windows XP and later will be OK.

# Implementation

An implementation of this TIP can be found in the [tip-487](https://core.tcl.tk/tcl/timeline?r=tip-487) branch.
Tk has a [tip-487](https://core.tcl.tk/tk/timeline?r=tip-487) branch as well.

# Rejected Alternatives

Originally, XP-support was suggested to be removed as well, but it turns out
that it's too early to do that now and gives too little benefit. Since XP
seems to be even more popular than Vista, support for both of those could
be done at the same time in a future Tcl/Tk release. But that decision will
be left up to another TIP. 

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
