# TIP 488: Remove tcl_precision
	Author:         Arjen Markus <arjenmarkus@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Voting
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           In progress
	Created:        24-Nov-2017
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       Tcl, string representation, floating-point
	Tcl-Version:    9.0
-----
<!-- TOC BEGIN (auto generated with tiptoc) -->
* <a href='#toc-2'>Abstract</a>
* <a href='#toc-3'>Rationale</a>
* <a href='#toc-4'>Proposal</a>
* <a href='#toc-5'>Compatibility considerations</a>
* <a href='#toc-6'>Reference Implementation</a>
* <a href='#toc-7'>See Also</a>
* <a href='#toc-8'>Copyright</a>

<!-- TOC END -->
# <a id='toc-2'></a>Abstract

Currently, Tcl supports a magic variable `tcl_precision` that is used in the
implicit formatting of floating-point numbers to string representation. It was
introduced a long time ago as a means to speed up such conversion, but it has
lost all usefulness since the introduction of the magic value "0" in TIP 132.
This TIP proposes to remove the variable altogether.

# <a id='toc-3'></a>Rationale

Tcl has long relied on the value of the magic variable `tcl_precision` to convert
floating-point number to strings that are readable by human beings. Its origin
lies in the distant past, when any value was stored as a string and the more
precision was required, the more costly the conversion.

Since Tcl stores variables as Tcl_Objs instead of strings and the ubiquitous use
of IEEE floating-point representation, the use of this variable has become an
arcane practice, as exemplified by TIP 132, which deprecates its use in favour
of a fixed, but magic, value 0, to indicate that as much precision is to be
used as necessary for a faithful representation of the number as a string. In the
context of IEEE representation, that means 17 digits suffice.

If a user wants to limit the number of digits by which a floating-point value is
represented as a human-readable string, then much better alternatives exist in the
form of the `[format]` command. This gives much more control over the number format
than `tcl_precision` has ever promised.

Furthermore, its existence and the description of its implicit role has been
the cause for confusion of novice Tcl programmers in the past and in recent times.

Now that we are cleaning up the code base for Tcl 9, time has come to remove this
relic as well.

# <a id='toc-4'></a>Proposal

* Remove the variable as a magic variable from all source code.

* Remove it from the manual pages. Instead recommend the use of `[format]` for this purpose.

# <a id='toc-5'></a>Compatibility considerations

The variable has had no justifiable use since Tcl 8.5. The TIP proposing its
practical deprecation was created in 2003, so 14 years ago.

Code relying on its existence may produce slightly different results, but only as
far as the string representation is concerned. If the numbers are converted back from
string to floating-point, then of course, differences may occur as well, but these should
be viewed as bugs in the original code, as a value for `tcl_precision` unequal to zero and
smaller than 17, will not guarantee a lossless conversion to and from strings.

# <a id='toc-6'></a>Reference Implementation

A [branch](http://core.tcl.tk/tcl/timeline?r=tip-488) is available.

# <a id='toc-7'></a>See Also

TIP #132: Revised Floating-Point Conversions in Tcl

# <a id='toc-8'></a>Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

