# TIP 49: I/O Subsystem: Add API Tcl_OutputBuffered(chan)
	Author:       Rolf Schroedter <rolf.schroedter@dlr.de>
	State:        Final
	Type:         Project
	Vote:         Done
	Created:      25-Jul-2001
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Version:  8.4
-----

# Abstract

This document proposes the new public function _Tcl\_OutputBuffered\(\)_,
analogous to the existing public function _Tcl\_InputBuffered\(\)_.

# Rationale

Tcl has a _Tcl\_InputBuffered\(\)_ function but no analog
function for the output buffer. 
A _Tcl\_OutputBuffered\(\)_ function would be useful
for non-blocking channel drivers which need to know the 
number of bytes pending in Tcl's output queue.

The implementation of [[35]](35.md) allows one to query the number of bytes 
in the channels input and output queues with a _[fconfigure -queue]_
option. This is a useful feature especially for serial ports
because the input/output may be really slow or even stall.

On the driver level only the number of bytes in the system queue
can be queried. For a non-blocking channel there may also be
some pending output in Tcl buffers. 
Obviously there is not much sense to know only the byte counter
at driver level without knowing _Tcl\_OutputBuffered\(\)_.

# Related Ideas

It could also be useful to add general _[fconfigure -inputbuffer
-outputbuffer]_ options for all channels returning the values from
_Tcl\_InputBuffered\(chan\)_ and _Tcl\_OutputBuffered\(chan\)_ respectively.

At this opportunity the code of _Tcl\_Seek\(\)_ and _Tcl\_Tell\(\)_
may be shortened, because it repeats the code of 
_Tcl\_InputBuffered\(\)_ and _Tcl\_OutputBuffered\(\)_.

# Implementation

This function would be added to _generic/tclIO.c_ and be 
stubs enabled. This new API should not have any impact
on existing applications.

The implementation is analog to what is done in _Tcl\_Tell\(\)_:

	
	/*
	 *----------------------------------------------------------------------
	 *
	 * Tcl_OutputBuffered --
	 *
	 *	Returns the number of bytes of output currently buffered in the
	 *	common internal buffer of a channel.
	 *
	 * Results:
	 *	The number of output bytes buffered, or zero if the channel is not
	 *	open for writing.
	 *
	 * Side effects:
	 *	None.
	 *
	 *----------------------------------------------------------------------
	 */
	
	int
	Tcl_OutputBuffered(chan)
	    Tcl_Channel chan;			/* The channel to query. */
	{
	    ChannelState *statePtr = ((Channel *) chan)->state;
						/* State of real channel structure. */
	    ChannelBuffer *bufPtr;
	    int bytesBuffered;
	
	    for (bytesBuffered = 0, bufPtr = statePtr->outQueueHead;
		bufPtr != (ChannelBuffer *) NULL;
		bufPtr = bufPtr->nextPtr) {
		bytesBuffered += (bufPtr->nextAdded - bufPtr->nextRemoved);
	    }
	    if ((statePtr->curOutPtr != (ChannelBuffer *) NULL) &&
		    (statePtr->curOutPtr->nextAdded > statePtr->curOutPtr->nextRemoved)) {
	        statePtr->flags |= BUFFER_READY;
	        bytesBuffered +=
	            (statePtr->curOutPtr->nextAdded - statePtr->curOutPtr->nextRemoved);
	    }
	    return bytesBuffered;
	}
	

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.


