# TIP 491: Threading Support: phasing out non-threaded builds
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        11-Dec-2017
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       threads
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-491
-----

# Abstract

Since [TIP #364](364.md) proposed improving thread support, time has come to gradually phase out
non-threaded builds on all platforms. On Windows and MacOSX, there are known problems
on non-threaded build. But also on UNIX it is becoming increasingly difficult to support
both threaded and non-threaded builds. This TIP proposes a gradual deprecation and removal
of support for non-threaded builds.

# Rationale

Non-threaded builds have a number of known problems:

 * On Windows, DDE and sockets don't work correctly, as they need threads to operate.

 * On UNIX, the new `epoll()` and `kqueue()` notifiers ([TIP #458](458.md)) expect the pthread locking to be available.

Further on, the nmake build system uses a different suffix, `t`, than the autoconf-based build system, a historical
mistake that cannot be corrected in a patch release. Let's correct that in Tcl 8.7.

A common misconception is that non-threaded builds are necessary to make `vfork()` and/or signals work correctly. That
may have been true in the past, but not any more: `vfork()` works fine in threaded builds, the only caveat is that
threads started before the vfork don't survive the fork. So, as long as new threads are created after doing the fork,
everything should work fine. Applications like AOLserver use this already.

If the developers of Tcl itself can count on threading facilities as part of the foundation, they can be free to use
threads when useful in writing the code of the Tcl library itself, without being bound to also invent a thread-free
version to cover the --disable-threads configuration.

# Proposal

  * Include the following snippet in `tcl.h`:
  <pre>
     #ifndef TCL\_THREADS
	 #   define TCL\_THREADS 1
	 #endif
  </pre>

  * Include the following snippet in `tclInt.h`:
  <pre>
     #if TCL\_THREADS && !defined(USE\_THREAD\_ALLOC)
	 #   define USE\_THREAD\_ALLOC 1
	 #endif
  </pre>

This means that the (nmake/autoconf) build systems no longer need to explicitly set those
two options, a threaded build will be the default. Non-threaded builds are still possible,
adding the flag `-DTCL_THREADS=0` to the Makefile. Hopefully this further discourages
non-threaded builds.

  * In the autoconf build system, remove the `--disable-threads` option.

  * In the nmake build system, don't use `t` any longer as suffix, and remove the `nothreads` and `thrdalloc` build options.

In Tcl 9:

  * fully remove the use of `TCL_THREADS` throughout the whole source
    code. The value is assumed to be `1`
    everywhere. Non-threaded builds are no longer possible.

# Implementation

An implementation of this TIP can be found in the [tip-491](https://core.tcl.tk/tcl/timeline?r=tip-491) branch.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
