# TIP 493: Cease Distribution of http 1.0
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sf.net>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        29-Dec-2017
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-493
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to stop distributing package http 1.0 with Tcl source
code distributions.

# Background

Tcl source code distributions since 7.5 have included a copy of the
package _http_ 1.0. When first created around 1996, it served as a nice
demonstration of the new commands _socket_ and _package_. It also provided
some useful commands for interacting with the World Wide Web, which at that
point was still fairly new.

# Analysis

Package _http_ 1.0 is obsoleted by package _http_ 2 which is distributed
with Tcl.  It implements an obsolete version of the HTTP protocol. It uses
abandoned packaging conventions suitable only for retaining Tcl 7
compatibility.  It is no longer a good example, but a poor one.  Its files
have not been substantially changed in nearly 18 years.

# Proposal

Remove the package _http_ 1.0 from all source code release of Tcl from 8.7 on.
Adjust Makefiles to accomplish this, and remove the files from 
fossil tracking.

# Compatibility

There are no known uses or users of http 1. Any hypothetical users
have the option to retrieve http 1 from any Tcl release from the last
several years to use and distribute as they need.

# Prototype

Fossil branch tip-493 contains an implementation of this proposal.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

