# TIP 503: End Tcl 8.3 Source Compatibility Support
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        05-Feb-2018
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-503
-----

# Abstract

Stop supporting source compatibility with pre-8.4 Tcl.

# Background

Long ago, we revised the signatures of many public Tcl routines
to better serve the cause of const-correctness. [[27]](27.md).
These revisions created a source incompatibility with existing
extensions and applications using Tcl, so at the same time a
set of compiler directives were created to allow opting for
the pre-8.4 signatures in place of the 8.4 signatures.  These
were always intended as a support for migration, not a permanent
feature.  See [[the wiki]](https://wiki.tcl-lang.org/3669) for
much more detail.

When originally put in place, these directives were a positive support
to make possible orderly migration from one source interface to
another.  Today, these directives are a negative feature that enable
code to stay stubbornly behind the times for no value. It's difficult
to believe that compatibility with Tcl 8.3 header files is still of
vital importance to anyone.

# Proposal

Remove all directives that support source compatibility with pre-8.4
versions of Tcl. This includes **NO\_CONST**, **USE\_NON\_CONST**,
**USE\_COMPAT\_CONST**, **CONST84**, **CONST84\_RETURN**.

# Compatibility

Any code that has not migrated to the Tcl 8.4 interface will
need to do so to work with Tcl 8.7.

# Implementation

Much of this has already been committed to the core-8-branch as
part of the implementation of [[485]](485.md).  The last additional
bit is in the tip-503 branch.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

