# TIP 510: Add Rbc to Tk
	Author:         René Zaumseil <r.zaumseil@freenet.de>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        5-Jun-2018
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tk
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tk-Branch:      tip-510
	Vote-Summary:   Rejected 1/3/1
	Votes-For:      DKF
	Votes-Against:  KBK, JN, FV
	Votes-Present:  BG
	Vote-Comments:  code not yet ready, needs porting to macOS; alternate
	                might be to just co-distribute, just as TDBC is with Tcl
-----

# Abstract

*Rbc* aka "Refactored BLT Components" provides some widgets which are missing in *Tk*.
This TIP intends to add *Rbc* in the same way as *Ttk* to *Tk*.

# Rationale

*Tk* has already adopted some of *BLT/Rbc* commands.
Still missing are the widgets.

*Rbc* is available on sourceforge and github, but the development is stalled.

Modernizing *Rbc* and including it in *Tk* will give some great new widgets.
Using the same approach like in *Ttk* will give results in very short time.
There is also less risk because *Rbc* is already used in different projects.

# Specification

C-source code will be put in `.../generic/rbc/`
Tcl-source  code will be put in `.../library/rbc/`
Test files will be put in `.../tests/rbc/`

The *Rbc* files will be added to the makefiles.
The call to the `Rbc_Init()` function will be added in tkWindow.c

## Platform Compatibility

Initially, there will not be support for macOS when not using X11 for
rendering. _This is an interim situation stemming from the Rbc
developers being unable to target that platform when writing code;
implementation there will be welcome and authorized under this TIP._

# Discussion

Which commands should be included?

- **vector**: needed for graph
- **graph**: curve display widget
- **stripchart**: 
- **barchart**:
- **busy**: not needed, because we already have **tk busy**
- **winop**: not needed; only functionality not duplicated is **winop snap**

Should there be a special switch to enable compiling and including *Rbc*?

Should we change *Rbc* to some other name to prevent name clashes?

Should we export a C-interface?

See also discussion at the [wiki](http://wiki.tcl.tk/55360).

# Implementation

A patch implementing these changes will be available in the fossil
repository in the [tip-510 branch](https://core.tcl.tk/tk/timeline?r=tip-510).

Test/Documentation updates not yet done.

# Alternatives

- Rewrite new tk widgets with code of rbc

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
