# TIP 517: Add -activerelief Configuration Option to the menu widget
	Author:         Francois Vogel <fvogelnew1@free.fr>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        13-Sept-2018
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       tk menu
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to get rid of the motif-style rendering that is still how the active menu entry is rendered on Linux.

# Rationale

On Linux, the active entry of menues is rendered with a **TK\_RELIEF\_RAISED** relief. This is hardcoded in ***unix/tkUnixMenu.c*** which prevents users from having, say, a flat rendering which is usually praised as more modern.

This issue originally surfaced in [bug 43b596451e] (https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/tktview/43b596451ec6b59359145ff32e689a2eec70bb85).

# Proposal

It is proposed to add an **-activerelief** configuration option to the menu widget, to make the relief of the active entry configurable. Acceptable values are **raised**, **sunken**, **flat**, **ridge**, **solid**, and **groove**. 

For backwards compatibility reasons, this new option will have its defaults such that the rendering is unchanged compared to the current state of affairs, i.e. it will be **raised** on Linux, and **flat** on other platforms.

This new option will be accepted on all platforms, however on macOS it will be silently ignored since the native menues are used on this platform (***TkpDrawMenuEntry*** is an empty procedure on macOS).

# Alternatives

Alternatively, instead of adding a new **-activerelief** menu option, the issue raised in [bug 43b596451e] (https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/tktview/43b596451ec6b59359145ff32e689a2eec70bb85) could be resolved by changing the rendering of the active entry in Linux menues to become **TK\_RELIEF\_FLAT**, and keep the current **TK\_RELIEF\_RAISED** only if **tk\_strictMotif** is set. The drawback is that this would constitute a backwards incompatible change - However in turn this could be deemed acceptable in the current alpha state of 8.7.

Having balanced the pros and cons between the two approaches, I'd prefer to add **-activerelief**, which in addition to be a backwards compatible change, has the merit of introducing additional configuration flexibility.

# Implementation

An implementation of this TIP can be found in the [tip-517 branch]
(https://core.tcl.tk/tk/timeline?r=tip-517).

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

