# TIP 519: Inline export/unexport option to TclOO method definition
	Author:       Pietro Cerutti <gahr@gahr.ch>
	State:        Draft
	Type:         Project
	Vote:         Pending
	Created:      18-Oct-2018
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Version:  8.7
	Keywords:     TclOO
	Tcl-Branch:   tip-519
----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a way to declare a TclOO method's visibility at definition
time.

# Rationale

TclOO methods are either exported or unexported. By default, methods which name
starts with a lower case letter are exported.  It is possible to override the
default behaviour by a separate call to ***export*** or ***unexport*** at class
definition time. However, this separates the method definition from its
visibility declaration.

As an example, consider the definition of a class representing an RPC client to
some remote server. The operation of instances of this class is controlled by a
number of per-instance settings.

    oo::class create RPCClient {
        variable async ;# Send requests asynchronously
        variable debug ;# Log requests and response
        variable cache ;# Keep a cache of the responses to MRU requests
        variable tls   ;# Encrypt the connection using TLS
    }

Settings can be turned on and off. Additionally, their current true-ness can be
queried. A pattern to expose setters/getters for these settings would be as
follows:

    oo::define RPCClient {

        method +async { set async 1 }
        method -async { set async 0 }
        method ?async { set async   }
        export +async -async ?async

        method +debug { set debug 1 }
        method -debug { set debug 0 }
        method ?debug { set debug   }
        export +debug -debug ?debug

        method +cache { set cache 1 }
        method -cache { set cache 0 }
        method ?cache { set cache   }
        export +cache -cache ?cache

        method +tls { set tls 1 }
        method -tls { set tls 0 }
        method ?tls { set tls   }
        export +tls -tls ?tls
    }

# Proposal

This TIP proposes to extend the `method` subcommand of the `oo::define` command
to accept an optional argument to specify its visilibity inline.

    * method name ?option? argList bodyScript

Where ***option*** can be either ***-export*** or ***-unexport***. If no option
is provided, the default applies.

This change is backwards-compatible, as the new form is not currently valid and
would result in an wrong-number-of-arguments error.

The class definition in the previous example would then be as follows:

    oo::define RPCClient {

        method +async -export { set async 1 }
        method -async -export { set async 0 }
        method ?async -export { set async   }

        method +debug -export { set debug 1 }
        method -debug -export { set debug 0 }
        method ?debug -export { set debug   }

        method +cache -export { set cache 1 }
        method -cache -export { set cache 0 }
        method ?cache -export { set cache   }

        method +tls -export { set tls 1 }
        method -tls -export { set tls 0 }
        method ?tls -export { set tls   }
    }

# Implementation

See the `tip-519` branch.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
