# TIP #520; Make NaN Quiet
Author:		Kevin B. Kenny <kevin.b.kenny@gmail.com>
State:		Draft
Type:		Project
Vote:		Pending
Created:	18 October 2018
Post-History:
Tcl-Version:	8.7
Keywords:	Tcl, floating point, NaN, not a number
-----

## Abstract

This TIP proposes that the special floating point constants `NaN`,
`±NaN`, and `[±]NaN(`_hex_`)` be accepted in any context where
other floating point constants may appear. This change has the effect
of changing Tcl from 'signalling NaN' semantics (where floating-point
exceptions are errors) to 'quiet NaN' semantics (where floating-point
exceptions return the constant, `NaN`, and operations where one of the
operands is `NaN` propagate the `NaN` to their results).

## Background

Since Tcl 8.5, [[TIP 132](132.md)] Tcl has had the capability to
recognize the special IEEE floating point constants, `Inf`
(representing an infinity or an overflow) and `NaN` (representing a
value that is 'Not a Number', ordinarily the result of some sort of
floating point exception).  Infinities are now accepted on an equal
footing with other floating point constants; they can be passed
anywhere that such a constant can appear, and they follow IEEE 754
rules for arithmetic.

The constant, `NaN` is different.  If a floating-point expression
yields a `NaN`, or if `Tcl_GetDoubleFromObj` receives such a
constant, the system treats the condition as an error, '`domain error:
argument not in valid range`'.

This behaviour was specified explicitly in paragraph 5 of [TIP
132](132.md):

  > The input and output conversions shall allow for the IEEE special
    values `+Inf`, `-Inf`, and `NaN` (and for denormalized numbers). The
    [expr] command shall be changed to allow +Inf and -Inf as the
    result of an expression; `NaN` shall still cause an
    error. `Tcl_GetDoubleFromObj` shall treat `+Inf` and `-Inf` as it does
    any ordinary floating point number, and return an error for `NaN`.

This sort of handling was adopted because at the time, `NaN` was a
relatively new thing, and programmers were suspicious of it. Many
believed that if operations like _0./0._ or _asin(2.0)_ were allowed
to return `NaN` rather than throwing an immediate error, debugging
would be greatly complicated, to very little benefit. (The personal
recollection of the author of this TIP was that even infinities were
tough to sell, for much the same reason.)

Since then, `NaN` values have been much more broadly accepted. Most
C compilers have quiet-`NaN` behaviour by default; a floating-point
exception returns `NaN` rather than raising `SIGFPE`.  The world
seems to have accepted William Kahan's [remarks:](http://www.drdobbs.com/architecture-and-design/a-conversation-with-william-kahan/184410314)

  > My thesis is that exceptions are not errors unless they are
    handled badly. Exceptions are opportunities for extra
    computation.... An exception is an event for which any policy you
    choose in advance will subsequently be found disadvantageous for
    somebody who will then, for good reason, take exception to the
    policy.

This change in sentiment was underlined for the author of this TIP
by the fact that in no fewer than three separate conversations at the
2018 Tcl/Tk Conference, he was approached with queries about `NaN`
handling. An increasing number of users are dealing with external systems
that use `NaN` to indicate a missing value in a data set, and
need `NaN` to be passed in and out gracefully.

# Proposal

Tcl's expression evaluator, and the functions in `::tcl::mathfunc`
and `::tcl::mathop`, shall be changed to allow `NaN` values to
be returned from floating-point expressions. (This change has already
been available in the source code for a long time, and can be enabled
by adding `-DACCEPT_NAN` to the compilation options.)

The math functions `max` and `min` shall be defined so that if any
argument to the function is `NaN`, the output shall be `NaN`.

Functions requiring integers, functions coercing 'double' values to
integers (`int`, `wide`, `round`, `entier`), and the `isqrt`
function shall continue to throw errors when presented with `NaN`
(there seems to be nothing sensible to do with these cases).

The C interface `Tcl_GetDoubleFromObj` shall be modified to accept
NaN's without thowing errors.

# Reference implementation

Most of the implementation has been in the code base for along time,
albeit hidden, under the `-DACCEPT_NAN` compilation option.

A few changes (updates to the test suite to reflect the new default;
update to `Tcl_GetDoubleFromObj`; changes to `max` and `min`)
still need to be made; the link to the implementation branch will
be added to this TIP.

# Unresolved concerns

The change to `Tcl_GetDoubleFromObj`, alone among the changes outlined
in this proposal, may need to be delayed until Tcl 9. It introduces a
subtle incompatibility in C code in that quiet `NaN` values can be
returned to a caller that does not expect them. In particular, the
author has not yet investigated whether Tk methods such as `xview`,
`yview`, `xscroll`, and `yscroll` will survive such exceptional
arguments without throwing `SIGFPE`.  These are invalid arguments -
the author is willing to accept almost any behaviour that does not
render the UI unusable or abort the process, but we need to verify
that `.my.widget yview NaN` does not invoke nasal daemons.

