# TIP 520: Floating Point Classification Functions
	Author:		Kevin B. Kenny <kevin.b.kenny@gmail.com>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Pending
	Created:	21 October 2018
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Keywords:	Tcl, floating point, NaN, not a number
-----
# Abstract

This TIP proposes that the functions, `isfinite`, `isinf`, `isnan`,
`isnormal`, `issubnormal` and `isunordered` be added to the standard
set of Tcl mathematical functions, and that `fpclassify` be added to
the standard set of Tcl commands.

# Background

The discussion of [TIP 520](520.md) has revealed an additional
shortcoming in Tcl's model of floating point values: it provides no
easy way to classify them in terms of whether they are:

   * finite or infinite
   * unexceptional or Not-a-Number (`NaN`)
   * normal or subnormal (that is, in the ordinary arithmetic range or 
     gradually underflowed)
	 
The functions can be worked around from behaviours: for instance,
[`if {$x != $x} {...}`] will test for `NaN`, but these tests are
somewhat obscure and may also be fragile.
	 
This TIP proposes to add the necessary classifiers.

# Proposal

The set of mathematical functions shall be expanded to include the following:

  * `isfinite`(_value_)
  
  > Returns 1 if _value_ is finite. that is, if it is zero, subnormal,
    or normal. Returns 0 if the number is infinite or `NaN`. Throws an
    error if _value_ cannot be promoted to a floating-point value.
	
  * `isinf`(_value_)
  
  > Returns 1 if _value_ is infinite. Returns 0 for anything else,
    that is, if it is zero, subnormal, normal or `NaN`. Throws an
    error if _value_ cannot be promoted to a floating-point value.
	
  * `isnan`(_value_)
  
  > Returns 1 if _value_ is a Not-a-Number. Returns 0 for anything
    else, that is, if it is zero, subnormal, normal or
    infinite. Throws an error if _value_ cannot be promoted to a
    floating-point value.
    
  * `isnormal`(_value_)
  
  > Returns 1 if _value_ is a normal floating_point value.  Returns 0
    if it is any other floating_point value, that is, if it is zero,
    subnormal, infinite or `NaN`. Throws an error if _value_ cannot be
    promoted to a floating-point value.

  * `issubnormal`(_value_)
 
  > Returns 1 if _value_ is a subnormal number, that is, the result of
    a gradual underflow. Returns 0 if the number is anything else
    (zero, normal, infinite, or `NaN`). Throws an error if _value_
    cannot be promoted to a floating-point value.
	
  * `isunordered`(_value1_, _value2_)
  
  > Returns 1 if _value1_ and _value2_ cannot be compared for
    ordering, that is, if either one is `NaN`. Returns 0 if both
    values can be ordered, that is, if they are both chosen from among
    the set of zero, subnormal, normal and infinite values. Throws an
    error if either _value1_ or _value2_ cannot be promoted to a
    floating-point value.
	
The set of Tcl commands shall be augmented with the following:

  * `fpclassify` _value_
  
  > Returns one of the following strings:
  
  > > `ZERO` - _value_ is a floating point zero

  > > `SUBNORMAL` - _value_ is the result of a gradual underflow

  > > `NORMAL` - _value_ is an ordinary floating-point number (not zero, subnormal, infinite, nor NaN).

  > > `INFINITE` - _value_ is a floating-point infinity
  
  > > `NAN` - _value_ is Not-a-Number.
  
  > Throws an error if _value_ is not a floating-point value.
  
# Reference implementation

To be developed.

# Note

This TIP is intended as a companion TIP to [TIP 520](520.md), but
the functions are thought to be useful irrespective of whether 520
is accepted. Hence, it is being proposed separately.
