# TIP 522: Test error codes with Tcltest
	Author:		Peter Spjuth <peter.spjuth@gmail.com>
	State:		Draft
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Pending
	Created:	22-Oct-2018
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Version:	8.7
	Tcl-Branch:	tip-522
	Keywords:	tcltest, error codes
-----

# Abstract

Proposes a new test option to test error codes (not to be confused with
return codes).

# Rationale

All or most core commands have error codes with their errors.
With the addition of try and throw, error codes are now an integral part
of the error ecosystem.
However, testing them is a bit clunky and few commands have tests for them.

The most obvious test usage for them are exact matching and prefix matching,
both easily done with a glob pattern since error codes do not have special
characters.

Having an error code check without requiring return code error makes no sense
so as a convenience `-returnCodes 1` is set if not present. A user that for some
reason wants to allow more than 1 may still do so.

# Specification

Add a new option, **-errorCode**, to the **test** command in the
**tcltest** package.
This is a glob pattern and defaults to "`*`".
When an error occurs in the body evaluation, the pattern is tested
against the error code from test execution.
When **-errorCode** is given, and **-returnCodes** does not include
`1` (or `error`, equivalently) so it is impossible for a valid error
code to be generated, **-returnCodes** is set to `1`.

# Example

This:

	test dict-4.13 {dict replace command: type check is mandatory} -body {
	    dict replace { a b c d e }
	} -returnCodes error -result {missing value to go with key}
	test dict-4.13a {dict replace command: type check is mandatory} {
	    catch {dict replace { a b c d e }} -> opt
	    dict get $opt -errorcode
	} {TCL VALUE DICTIONARY}

is replaced by this:

	test dict-4.13 {dict replace command: type check is mandatory} -body {
	    dict replace { a b c d e }
	} -errorCode {TCL VALUE DICTIONARY} -result {missing value to go with key}

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
