# TIP 524: Custom Definition Dialects for TclOO
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        23-Oct-2018
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       Tcl, object orientation, customization
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-524
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a mechanism for allowing classes to control how their
instances define themselves.

# Rationale

Though TclOO has a powerful mechanism for handling definitions (essentially
based on executing Tcl scripts in a namespace that has the definition
commands, via a mechanism very similar to `namespace eval`) it is not simple
for user code to extend those mechanisms in a way that is specific to a
particular set of classes. The **oo::dialect** package in Tcllib provides ways
of doing this, but is internally rather complex; I believe the process should
be much simpler.

# Proposal

Every class will gain two internal fields that describe what namespace will be
used to configure the instances of that class (i.e., what namespace to use in
the `namespace eval`). One of those fields will be used when the instance of
that class is being configured via `oo::define` and the other will be used
when the instance is being configured va `oo::define` (or `self` within
`oo::define`). When looking up what namespace to use, the inheritance
hierarchy will be used to find the first class in the resolution order that
defines a namespace; by default `oo::object` will provide the namespace
`::oo::objdefine` for one of the fields and `oo::class` will provide
`::oo::define` for the other, these being the current namespaces used for
definitions.

There will a new class definition for exerting control over these fields:

 > **definitionnamespace** ?_kind_? _namespace_

This allows the current class to have its definition namespace for _kind_ set
to _namespace_ (or the empty string). The _kind_ must be **-class** (the
default) or **-instance** to set the definition namespace for **oo::define**
and **oo::objdefine** respectively. The root classes, **oo::object** and
**oo::class**, cannot have their definition namespaces modified.

There will be a new introspection command for reading what the current
definition namespace is for a class:

 > **info class definitionnamespace** _class_ ?_kind_?

This will return from _class_ the name of the current definition namespace of
kind _kind_ (must be either **-class** or **-instance**; **-class** is the
default) that is set for _class_. If _class_ does not specify one, the empty
string is returned.

## Usage Example

Effective use of this feature depends on using `namespace path`.

    namespace eval mydialect {
        namespace path ::oo::define

        proc example {x} {
            puts "This is an example($x) in [uplevel 1 self]"
            method example {} [list puts example=$x]
        }
        proc constructor {arguments body} {
            set body [string cat {puts "This is [self]";} $body]
            tailcall ::oo::define constructor $arguments $body
        }
    }

    puts "<<POINT-1>>"

    oo::class create metaclass {
        superclass oo::class
        definitionnamespace mydialect
    }

    puts "<<POINT-2>>"

    metaclass create cls {
        constructor {abc} {
            puts "abc = $abc"
        }
        example 123
    }

    puts "<<POINT-3>>"
    set obj [cls create gorp xyz]
    puts "<<POINT-4>>"
    puts $obj
    $obj example

Which will print:

    <<POINT-1>>
    <<POINT-2>>
    This is an example(123) in ::metaclass
    <<POINT-3>>
    This is ::gorp
    abc = xyz
    <<POINT-4>>
    ::gorp
    example=123

# Implementation

Conceptual outline in the branch `dkf-oo-override-definition-namespaces` but
that uses a different API and lacks introspection.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
