# TIP 529: Add metadata dictionary property to tk photo image
    Author:         Harald Oehlmann <oehhar@users.sourceforge.net>
    State:          Draft
    Type:           Project
    Vote:           In progress
    Created:        07-Dec-2018
    Keywords:       Tk, image
    Tcl-Version:    8.7
    Tk-Branch:     tip529-image-metadata-no-match-method
-----

# Abstract

An additional property is proposed for photo images.
This property shall hold a dictionary with image metadata:

    myimage cget -metadata
    myimage configure -metadata [dict create DPI 300.0]

The content of the dictionary is initialized on image load and used on image save.

# Rationale

Image files may contain a lot of metadata like resolution, comments, GPS location etc.
This metadata should be accessible and modifiable for the following aims:

  * Make it available after image load on script level
  * Make it setable within the image
  * Write its data to the image file.

## image resolution

This TIP especially targets the resolution (DPI) value of the image.

The image resolution included in an image file is crucial for its usage, as many applications (word & co.) use this field to calculate a default size.
One may imagine, that image files used in `pdf4tcl` are automatically scaled to the correct resolution (e.g. the resolution saved in the image file).

This information is included in `.png` files (supported by core `Tk`) and many other image formats included in the `Img` package.

I authored an extension to the `Img` package to specify the `dpi` field of a `.bmp` file when writing. The syntax was accorded with Jeff Hobbs:

    myimage write file.bmp -format [list bmp -resolution 300 i]

This may be expressed (when all packages are adapted) by:

    myimage configure -metadata [dict create DPI 300.0]
    myimage write file.bmp

## Comment data

A comment may be used to save custom data in the image file.

An example is a vision automation project where a test procedure is connected to each image.
My solution is to use `.gif` images and to store the test procedure (a TCL script) in the gif's comment.

## Preview extension for new command "image metadata"

The match functions should also be able to return the metadata dictionary.
This is due to the plan by Paul Obermeier to make the `match` function available on the script level by itself.
See the discussion section for the message.

# Specification

## Metadata Dictionary

The property "**-metadata**" is added to each image.  It contains a dictionary,
where the keys of the dictionary are specific to each photo image format.

The following default keys are proposed:

| Key       | Description      | Example image formats |
|:---------:|:----------------:|:---------------------:|
| `DPI`     | Horizontal Image resolution in DPI (double) | png |
| `aspect`  | Aspect ratio horizontal/vertical (double)   | png,gif |
| `comment` | Text comment     | png, gif |

Comments on the key choice:

  * Abreviations are in upper case
  * Words are in American English, and in lower case (except proper nouns)
  * Vertical DPI is expressed as `DPI/aspect`. This is because some image formats may feature `aspect`, and no `resolution` value.

It is valid to set any key within the application.
Any unknown key should be ignored by the application and image format drivers.

If a particular image does not specify any keys (whether during creation or otherwise) then the dictionary will be empty.

Each photo image format driver may define additional keys and may decide to use them for input (as a parameter for image read and/or image write), output (as an image read result) or both.

The TIP implementation does not propose to immediately implement all possible keys of all image formats for reading and writing.
The set of predefined image keys may grow over time on a per-case basis instead.

## Commands

The following commands are extended by a -metadata parameter:

    image create photo myimage -metadata $metadict
    myimage cget -metadata
    myimage configure -metadata $metadict
    myimage data -metadata $metadict
    myimage put -metadata $metadict
    myimage read -metadata $metadict
    myimage write -metadata $metadict

Any image format handler may use the content of the metadata dictionary.
This may be an ongoing process, especially within the Img package.

Here is an overview, which command reads or sets the metadata dictionary:

| Command | Reads current image metadata dict | Reads command options metadata dict | Writes current image metadata dict | Driver data merged in |
| :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: |
| image create | no | yes | yes | yes |
| myimage cget | yes | no | no | no |
| myimage configure | yes (1) | yes | yes | yes |
| myimage put | no | yes | no | no |
| myimage read | no | yes | no | no |
| myimage data | yes (1) | yes | no | no |
| myimage write | yes (1) | yes | no | no |

Footnotes:

(1) The current metadata is ignored if a metadata dictionary is given as command parameter.

Each command is now discussed within its own section:

### image create

The `create` command will parse the image data and create the metadata dictionary of the image.

As an example, a gif file with a comment would create a comment metadata key within the image:

    % image create photo myimage -format GIF -file testwithcomment.gif
    % myimage cget -metadata
    Comment {This is the image comment}

A metadata dictionary given on the command line will be merged with the parsed metadata dictionary.
The meta data read from the file will be given priority.
This enables the specification of default values for keys which should be present.

An example with the same image as above:

    % image create photo myimage -format GIF -file testwithcomment.gif\
       -metadata [dict create User A Comment "Comment from command line"]
    % myimage cget -metadata
    User A Comment "This is the image comment"

### myimage cget

The metadata dictionary may be retrieved by:

    myimage cget -metadata

### myimage configure

The metadata dictionary of the image may be overwritten by:

    myimage configure -metadata [dict create Comment "Comment from cconfigure"]

The image data is not touched and no image data interpretation is triggered.

The retrieval methods will return the metadata dictionary as for any other option:

    % myimage configure -metadata
    -metadata {} {} {} {Comment {Current comment}}

Setting one of the `-format`, `-data` or `-file` options to a different value will recreate the image with the new parameters.
In this case, an eventually present `-metadata` option will first replace the present metadata of the image.
Then, the image recreation will take place (using an eventually specified metadata dictionary) and may add keys to the image metadata dictionary.

It is not possible to trigger an image recreation by just specifying a metadata dictionary.
This is to avoid unneeded image recreation.

Note: parameters to change the rendered image should use the `-format` option. The metadata may provide additional data.

When the image is rendered again due to a change of the options `-file`, `-data` or `-format`, the following procedure applies:

  * The current image metadata is replaced by an eventually specified metadata.
  * The image driver is called with the resulting metadata to render the image.
  * Any metadata key returned by the image driver rendering is set in the image metadata. In consequence, we get a merge of the current and the generated metadata.

### myimage put

The `put` command sets (parts of) the image data to the specified new image data.

The `-metadata` property of the image is not changed.
This is consistent of other parameters like `-format`.

To replace the whole image including metadata, the `configure` command may be used by setting the `-data` option.

Example with gif data containing a comment:

    % image create myimage -metadata [dict create Comment "Comment from image create"]
    % myimage put $GIFWithCommentData
    % myimage cget -metadata
    Comment {Comment from image create}

A `-metadata` option may be specified to support the read operation. Nevertheless, this metadata is not included in the metadata property of the image.

Example:

    % image create myimage -metadata [dict create Comment "Comment from image create"]
    % myimage put $GIFWithCommentData -metadata [dict create Comment "Comment from put command line"]
    % myimage cget -metadata
    Comment {Comment from image create}

### myimage read

The `read` command sets (parts of) the image data to new image data read from a file.
This command acts like the `put` command, except that the image data comes from a file.

The `-metadata` property of the image is not changed.
This is consistent of other parameters like `-format`.

To replace the whole image including metadata, the `configure` command may be used by setting the `-file` option.

Example with a gif file containing a comment:

    % image create myimage -metadata [dict create Comment "Comment from image create"]
    % myimage read gifwithcomment.gif
    % myimage cget -metadata
    Comment {Comment from image create}

A `-metadata` option may be specified to support the read operation. Nevertheless, this metadata is not included in the metadata property of the image. There is currently no practical application for this, but there might be examples which use that.

Example:

    % image create myimage -metadata [dict create Comment "Comment from image create"]
    % myimage read test.gif -metadata [dict create Comment "Comment from put command line"]
    % myimage cget -metadata
    Comment "Comment from image create"

### myimage data

The `data` command writes the image data into a variable.

If the image formats supports a specified metadata key, it is included in the output file.

If a `-metadata` option is given, the metadata property of the image is ignored.
Otherwise, the metadata property of the image is used.

Example to write a comment in gif data included in the image properties:

    % image create myimage -file test.png -metadata [dict create Comment "Comment from image create"]
    % myimage data -format "GIF"
    ... GIF data with comment included

Example to specify the comment with the command options:

    % image create myimage -file test.png
    % myimage data -format "GIF"-metadata [dict create Comment "Comment from data command"]
    ... GIF data with comment included

### myimage write

The `write` command writes the image data to a file.
With respect to metadata, it works the same way as the `data` command.

Example to write a metadata comment:

    % image create myimage -file test.png
    % myimage write GifwithComment.gif -format "GIF"-metadata [dict create Comment "Comment from write command"]
    ... GIF data with comment included

### Notes on Options to image and metadata creation

The metadata is not suited to passing processing options to the driver.
Such options should be added to the `-format` option instead.

In contrast, a driver may understand options passed through the `-format` option to modify its metadata processing.

Lets try the following imaginary example:
An image driver contains a full EXIF parser which creates many keys as output.
This processing is expensive, in both time and output data creation.
As a consequence, the driver creator may decide to only create the EXIF output when an option requesting such is specified:

    image create photo photo.jpg -format "jpg -exif 1"

## Image format driver interface

The image format driver interface is changed in the following aspects:

### Pass metadata dictionary as parameter

Each driver function receives a Tcl object pointer `metadataIn` as parameter.
This parameter serves to pass a metadata dictionary to the driver function.
It may be NULL. Doing so indicates that the metadata dictionary is empty.

A typical driver code snippet to check for a metadata key is:

    if (NULL != metadataIn) {
        Tcl_Obj *itemData;
        Tcl_DictObjGet(interp, metadataIn, Tcl_NewStringObj("Comment",-1), &itemData));

To strictly fulfill the objective of the TIP it is only necessary for the `Write` functions of the format driver to receive metadata.

Nevertheless, it is implemented the same way as the `-format` parameter which is available to all functions.
This allows the passing of additional options to the driver which only concern the metadata processing.

### Receive a metadata dictionary from the driver (FileRead,StringRead)

The image match and read functions (FileMatch, StringMatch, FileRead, StringRead) may set keys in a prepared metadata dictionary to return them.
These functions receive an additional Tcl object pointer as "metadataOut" as parameter.

This parameter may be NULL. This indicates that no metadata can be returned (`put`, `read` subcommands).

This parameter is initialized to an empty unshared dictionary object if metadata return is intended (`image create` command, `configure` subcommand).
The driver may set dictionary keys in this object to return metadata.

A sample driver code snippet is:

    if (NULL != metadataOut) {
        Tcl_DictObjPut(NULL, metadataOut, Tcl_NewStringObj("XMP",-1), Tcl_NewStringObj(xmpMetadata);

### Image format driver interface

For image format drivers a new registration procedure is proposed. This new procedure includes functions with the new parameters.
In addition, the parameters are reordered to always have the order of

  - interp,
  - input parameter(s),
  - output parameter(s),
  - auxiliary function(s).

The new stubs enabled function is:

    void Tk_CreatePhotoImageFormatVersion3(const Tk_PhotoImageFormatVersion3 *formatPtr)

The function parameters of `Tk_PhotoImageFormatVersion3` are as follows:

    int (Tk_ImageFileMatchProcVersion3) (Tcl_Interp *interp, Tcl_Channel chan,
            const char *fileName, Tcl_Obj *format, Tcl_Obj *metadataIn, int *widthPtr,
            int *heightPtr, Tcl_Obj *metadataOut,);

    int (Tk_ImageStringMatchProcVersion3) (Tcl_Interp *interp, Tcl_Obj *dataObj,
            Tcl_Obj *format, Tcl_Obj *metadataIn, int *widthPtr, int *heightPtr,
            Tcl_Obj *metadataOut);

    int (Tk_ImageFileReadProcVersion3) (Tcl_Interp *interp, Tcl_Channel chan,
            const char *fileName, Tcl_Obj *format, Tcl_Obj *metadataIn,
            Tk_PhotoHandle imageHandle, int destX, int destY, int width,
            int height, int srcX, int srcY, Tcl_Obj *metadataOut);

    int (Tk_ImageStringReadProcVersion3) (Tcl_Interp *interp, Tcl_Obj *dataObj,
            Tcl_Obj *format, Tcl_Obj *metadataIn, Tk_PhotoHandle imageHandle,
            int destX, int destY, int width, int height, int srcX, int srcY,
            Tcl_Obj *metadataOut);

    int (Tk_ImageFileWriteProcVersion3) (Tcl_Interp *interp, const char *fileName,
            Tcl_Obj *format, Tcl_Obj *metadataIn, Tk_PhotoImageBlock *blockPtr);

    int (Tk_ImageStringWriteProcVersion3) (Tcl_Interp *interp, Tcl_sObj *format,
            Tcl_Obj *metadataIn, Tk_PhotoImageBlock *blockPtr);

## Documentation

The script-visible changes are documented in the manpage `doc/photo.n`.
The changes to the C level interface on the other hand are documented in `doc/CrtPhImgFmt.3`.

# Implementation

The implementation is done in branch `tip-529-image-metadata-no-match-method` of the Tk fossil repository.
The following metadata keys are implemented:

  * gif: comment
  * png: DPI, ratio

With thanks to Paul Obermeier, the `Img` package has implemented the new interface and uses it currently for setting and reporting of DPI information.

A set of test cases is included in the implementation.
In addition, the `Img` package features additional tests for this change which exercise additional features like the stub table and image parameters.

Note that the `Img` package currently links against the optional branch (see below), and not against the branch tag `tip-529-image-metadata-no-match-method`.
This was necessary to fix the file `tests/earth.gif`, as it is incomplete.

__Warning__: The two following chapters ("Discussion" and "Rejected alternatives") contain a lot of information not relevant for the TIP.
A reader only interested in the functionality of the TIP may stop here.

# Discussion

## `image metadata` command planned by Paul Obermeier

What about extending and exposing the functionality of the MatchProc function at the Tcl level?

That way it would be possible to implement a command like `image metadata <fileName>`, where
you can retrieve the image size, resolution and additional metadata without explicitely loading the image.

In my image browser ([Screenshot](http://www.posoft.de/html/poImgBrowseShots.html#Img1))
I am currently using a modified version of Tcllib's `fileutil::fileType` command to extract the
image size without creating a photo image. Getting that information (and additional metadata)
directly from the C-based image parsers would be faster and there would be no need to code that
functionality twice.

This function is implemented in Tk branch `tip-529-image-metadata`.

## Update DPI metadata property on image script

Paul Obermeier has made the following proposal:

How do you want to handle the physical resolution (DPI) in the case of image scaling?
Just keep the original DPI value or adjust the DPI values automatically, maybe using an option.

HaO: Currently, this is not thought out and may be implemented by another TIP.

## No use of other optional features by Paul Obermeier

I asked Paul, if he sees any use of the optional features below for him or TkImg.
The answer was: no, I don't see any use.

# Rejected Alternatives

Within the last two years of development, the following additional ideas were implemented as well.
They are all implemented in the Tk branch `tip-529-image-metadata-optional`.
They are not included in the TIP and not included in the main implementation.
People may speak up to get any feature back into the main feature branch.

The optional features are:

  * Implemented XMP metadata type for gif.
  * Optimized SVG processing to store the preparsed binary blob into the metadata. This blob may be used for fast scaling of the image.
  * Optimized driver internal communications: Provided a DString structure to the image format driver for the passing of data from the match functions to the read functions.
  * Optimized file access: Gave the image driver the ability to indicate that the file is not needed any more after the match call.

The following section discusses these optional features.
The format driver interface with all options is shown in the section after that.

Another rejected alternative using only one metadata pointer in the interface follows as the last section.

## XMP data

Photo images may contain an XMP data structure which may hold structured data.
The aim is to make this data accessible.
The parsing of the XML structure is not part of this TIP and may be done by other packages.

The metadata key is:

| Key       | Description      | Example image formats |
|:---------:|:----------------:|:---------------------:|
| `XMP`     | xmp image data   | gif,png               |

XMP support is implemented for the `gif` format.
It was removed from the main branch, due to not having a use case at the moment.

## SVG optimization by a metadata key holding the preparsed svg blob

### Rationale

This is used within the current SVG implementation included in Tk8.7a3.

The routines imported from the nanosvg project split SVG processing into two steps:

  1. Transform the xml data to a binary representation of the splines
  2. Render the splines to an image presentation

When an SVG file is loaded via

    image create photo i1 -file test.svg -format {svg -scaletoheight 16}

the file is read, the xml data loaded, and processing steps 1 and 2 are performed.

When the image is later scaled by:

    i1 configure -file "" -data {<svg source="metadata" >} -format {svg -scaletoheight 32}

the same steps are performed as on image load, while only step 2 would be necessary.
The performance is poor and the file must still be available.

The idea is to store the binary representation of the splines (result of processing step 1) as a key in the **-metadata** dictionary (say SVGBLOB). This then enables the code to only perform step 2 on scaling.

In addition, an svg image may even be "compiled" to the metadata structure, so the following command may work:

    image create i1 -metadata {SVGBLOB ...} -data {<svg source="metadata" >} -format {svg -scaletoheight 32}

While this will only work within the same patchlevel of Tk and on the same architecture (endianess, int size), as the format may change, it may be useful when creating a starkit, for example.

In my talk at ETCL 2019 I showed an Android GUI where buttons could be scaled by a pinch-to-zoom gesture. The current performance is quite poor.

### Specification

The SVG driver returns a preparsed image blob in the metadata key "SVGBLOB".
This data is used as image data, if the `-data` parameter contains the string "\<svg data=\"metadata\" />".

A sample script is as follows:

    image create photo foo -data $svggradient -format svg
    foo configure -file "" -data "\<svg data=\\"metadata\\" />" -format "svg -scale 2"

Internally, the driver uses a hidden DString structure to communicate between the match and read functions.

The output of the SVG parser is serialized into an array and put into the memory block.
All functions of the rendering functions dealing with the input data are changed to use the array.

### Discussion

I see only a small speed-up (around 10%) by this solution.
In addition, the version without this option is as fast as the optimized version.
So, we have a slowdown for the normal case and no gain for the optimized version.

My test script is as follows:

  * Take the file from [https://svgstudio.com/pages/free-sample]
  * Use the following script:
   
    image create photo foo -file Freesample.svg -format svg
    proc switch {} {
        foo configure -format {svg -scale 2}
        foo configure -format {svg -scale 1}
    }
    time switch 100
    40139.367 microseconds per iteration
    
  * Now activate the use of the metadata
    
    foo configure -file "" -data "<svg data=\"metadata\" />" -format "svg"
    38641.935 microseconds per iteration

For me, even removing the file operations and the parsing should be a magnitude faster.
But the facts are different.
Apparently copying all this data around in addition takes a lot of time.
And the svg-nano parser is super fast.
Most of the processing time is taken by image rendering.

## Match and read function communication memory

The image match and read functions get an additional parameter `driverInternalPtr` which points to an initialized DString structure.
The DString structure is cleared by the framework.

Via this DString the driver match function can pass data to its read function.

The rationale is the current implementation of the SVG driver:

  * The driver currently uses ThreadSpecific data to pass data from the match procedure to the read procedure. Due to that, a more simple alternate possibility is proposed.

## Indicate that the match function does not need the channel any more

The driver file match function may indicate that it does not need the channel any more.
This is done by setting the additional output int `closeChannel` to `1`.
In this case, a NULL driver is passed to the read driver function.

The rationale is the current implementation of the SVG driver:

  * The driver does not need the file any more after the match procedure. Thus, any preparing file operations (seek etc) may be omitted and a NULL channel may be passed.

## Format driver interface with all options

The function parameters in `Tk_PhotoImageFormatVersion3` are as follows:

    int (Tk_ImageFileMatchProcVersion3) (Tcl_Interp *interp, Tcl_Channel chan,
        const char *fileName, Tcl_Obj *format, Tcl_Obj *metadataIn, int *widthPtr,
        int *heightPtr, Tcl_Obj *metadataOut, int *closeChannelPtr,
        Tcl_DString *driverInternalPtr);

    int (Tk_ImageStringMatchProcVersion3) (Tcl_Interp *interp, Tcl_Obj *dataObj,
        Tcl_Obj *format, Tcl_Obj *metadataIn, int *widthPtr, int *heightPtr,
        Tcl_Obj *metadataOut, Tcl_DString *driverInternalPtr);

    int (Tk_ImageFileReadProcVersion3) (Tcl_Interp *interp, Tcl_Channel chan,
        const char *fileName, Tcl_Obj *format, Tcl_Obj *metadataIn,
        Tk_PhotoHandle imageHandle,
        int destX, int destY, int width, int height, int srcX, int srcY,
        Tcl_Obj *metadataOut, Tcl_DString *driverInternalPtr);

    int (Tk_ImageStringReadProcVersion3) (Tcl_Interp *interp, Tcl_Obj *dataObj,
        Tcl_Obj *format, Tcl_Obj *metadataIn, Tk_PhotoHandle imageHandle,
        int destX, int destY, int width, int height, int srcX, int srcY,
        Tcl_Obj *metadataOut, Tcl_DString *driverInternalPtr);

    int (Tk_ImageFileWriteProcVersion3) (Tcl_Interp *interp, const char *fileName,
        Tcl_Obj *format, Tcl_Obj *metadataIn, Tk_PhotoImageBlock *blockPtr);

    int (Tk_ImageStringWriteProcVersion3) (Tcl_Interp *interp, Tcl_sObj *format,
        Tcl_Obj *metadataIn, Tk_PhotoImageBlock *blockPtr);

## Single metadata parameter for input and output

A first approach was to use one metadata parameter to the format driver functions, combining input and output.
The properties are:

  * No new image format definition required.
  * It is not possible to tell the driver routines when no metadata output is expected.
  * The image driver function has to take shared objects into account and create a copy when doing modifications. Thus, a pointer to an object pointer must be passed.
  * A metadata dictionary must be prepared even if there is no metadata, and also cleaned after each match round.

This solution was not chosen due to the complicated way for the format driver functions to set a metadata dictionary.
In addition, it is seen as valueable, that the information "no metadata output, please" may be transmitted.

The implementation is in branch `tip-529-image-metadata-jan`.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

