# TIP 53: Addition of 'assert' Command
	Author:         Gerald W. Lester <Gerald.Lester@aspentech.com>
	Author:         Kevin Kenny <kennykb@acm.org>
	State:          Withdrawn
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        14-Aug-2001
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       bytecode,compiler
	Tcl-Version:    8.4
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes the addition of an _assert_ command and supporting
infrastructure to the Tcl core.

# Rationale

Many languages, including other scripting languages, have assertion
checking features that can be used to assist in validating program
correctness.  Typically, these assertion checking features can be
"compiled out" of production systems so as not to impact performance. 
To have a similar effect in Tcl, the assertion checking features must
be implemented at the byte code compiler level.

If, doing byte code compilation, an assert command is encountered the
byte code stream generated will be dependent on the value of the
_assert\_enabled_ command line option.  If the option is true, a byte
code stream will be emitted to implement the assert command.  If the
option is not true, no byte code will be emitted.

Similarly, if the interpreter encounters an _assert_ command \(either
compiled or uncompiled\), it will only execute it if the
_assert\_enabled_ command line option is true.

It is acceptable for the compiler to throw an error if the
_booleanExpression_ is not brace quoted.

# Tcl-Level Specification

The manual entry for the _assert_ command is included here:

----

# NAME

 > assert - Assert a run time validation condition

# SYNOPSIS

	   assert booleanExpression messageText

# DESCRIPTION

 > This command has no effect if the assert\_enabled command line
   option is not true at both compile and run time.  If the
   _assert\_enabled_ command line option is true at both compile and
   run time, the following behavior will occur:

 > 1. The _booleanExpression_ will be evaluated

 > 2. If the _booleanExpression_ evaluates to a true value,
      _assert::failed_ will be called at the global level with
      _messageText_ as its one and only parameter.

 > The default implementation of _assert::failed_ will write
   _messageText_ to standard out and _exit_ with a status code of
   1.

----

# Remarks

This TIP has been withdrawn because of other changes, both inside and
outside the Tcl core.

 1. The bytecode compiler \(8.4a4\) contains code that recognizes a
    no-op procedure of the form _proc no-op args \{\}_ and generates
    no bytecode if such a procedure is called with arguments that have
    no side effects.

 2. The _control_ package within tcllib implements a
    _::control::assert_ procedure that provides all the requested
    functionality.

These two, taken together, provide an implementation of the requested
functionality that is acceptable to the original author of this TIP.

# Copyright

This TIP is in the public domain.

