# TIP 535: Remove trailing zeroes in scale ticks
	Author:         Francois Vogel <fvogelnew1@free.fr>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        10-March-2019
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
	Tcl-Branch:     scale-tick-format
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to remove excess zeroes at the trail of values displaying the tick marks of scale widgets.

# Rationale

In some configuration of the display options of scale widgets, it is possible that one or more trailing zeroes be displayed for tick marks. These zeroes are believed to be useless and should be removed.

This is basically a [bugfix]. (https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/tktview/c9887a1fc9bbf2712f1f8eed6bf57178521722b8)

Nevertheless, since we have a strong tradition of trying very hard to not break any user application in the wild, and while the change is viewed only as a fix (it's just about removing useless trailing zeroes), the present TIP is raised to check the community point of view before merging the fix in the development branches.

# Specification

Before the change, the values of tick marks of scale widgets are displayed with the same format as the tick value, all with the same number of decimal places, possibly with trailing zeroes.

After the change, the values of tick marks of scale widgets are all still displayed with the same number of decimal places, but it is ensured the numer of decimal places are enough to have tick marks all accurate to within 20% of a tick interval. This effectively removes trailing zeroes.

ttk:scale widgets are not concerned by the change (since they do not display tick marks).

# Implementation

See the [scale-tick-format] (https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/timeline?r=scale-tick-format&unhide) branch.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
