# TIP 542: New encodings: UTF-16, UCS-2, Support for switchable (Androwish-compatible) Full Unicode support. 
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@users.sf.net>
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        10-May-2019
	Post-History:   
	Discussions-To: Tcl Core list
	Keywords:       Tcl
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     utf-max
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to add more encodings, and being able to switch Tcl
between Full Unicode mode (TCL\_UTF\_MAX>3, almost compatible with Androwish) and
current partial Unicode mode (as far as TIP #389 goes, using TCL\_UTF\_MAX=3) 

# Rationale

Tcl currently can be compiled in 3 different modes: using TCL\_UTF\_MAX=3, TCL\_UTF\_MAX=4
or TCL\_UTF\_MAX=6. The first 2 are actually equal now in Tcl 8.7 (since TIP #389). Using
TCL\_UTF\_MAX=6 is actually overkill, since no utf-8 character consists of more than 4 bytes.

Therefore it makes sense to reduce this to only two modes: TCL\_UTF\_MAX=3 means
being fully compatible with Tcl 8.6, while TCL\_UTF\_MAX=4 means compatibility with
the Androwish-version of Tcl. Defining TCL\_UTF\_MAX=6 results in a valid
compilation as well (functioning the same as TCL\_UTF\_MAX=4), only some buffer-sizes
will be 2 bytes larger than necessary.

Androwish made the choice to use an (at that time) un-supported Tcl mode: Changing the size
of the Tcl\_UniChar type using TCL\_UTF\_MAX=6. This causes a binary incompatibility
which results that all extensions need to be re-compiled with TCL\_UTF\_MAX=6 as well.
This TIP proposes to add a supported TCL\_UTF\_MAX=4 compilation mode to Tcl, which has
the same effect as the earlier unsupported TCL\_UTF\_MAX=6, but without the need to
re-compile all extensions. The need for re-compilation of all extensions is eliminated
by putting the 32-bit versions of the Tcl\_UniChar-related functions in different stub
entries than the 16-bit versions. This way, 99% of all extensions compiled with
TCL\_UTF\_MAX=3 keep functioning as before without the need for re-compilation.

The default compilation mode for Tcl will continue to be TCL\_UTF\_MAX=3, which is 100%
upwards compatible with Tcl 8.6.

# Specification

This document proposes:

 * Add new encodings "utf-16", "utf-16le", "utf-16be", "ucs-2", "ucs-2le", "ucs-2be".

 * Allow Tcl to be compiled with either -DTCL\_UTF\_MAX=3 (default), or with -DTCL\_UTF\_MAX=4.
   In the latter mode, the Tcl_UniChar type becomes a 32-bit type, but the stub entries for
   the 16-bit Tcl\_UniChar type are present as well. So, most extensions compiled with -DTCL\_UTF\_MAX=3
   will continue to work in either Tcl mode (for caveats, see below).

 * Allow Tcl extensions to be compiled with either -DTCL\_UTF\_MAX=3 (default), or with -DTCL\_UTF\_MAX=4,
   when Tcl is compiled with -DTCL\_UTF\_MAX=4.

 * Deprecate the "unicode" encoding. "utf-16" is supposed to be used in stead. The "unicode" encoding
   will NOT be removed in Tcl 9.0, since it's too common.

 * New functions:

     Tcl\_UtfToUtf16()
     
     Tcl\_Utf16ToUtfDString()
     
     Tcl\_UtfToUtf16DString()
     
     Tcl\_Utf16Len()
     
     Tcl\_Utf16Ncmp()
     
     Tcl\_Utf16Ncasecmp()
     
     Tcl\_Utf16CaseMatch()

     Those are the same as the _UniChar_ variants, but they use the "unsigned short" type in stead of Tcl\_UniChar. 

# Compatibility

As long as Tcl is compiled with -DTCL\_UTF\_MAX=3, this is fully upwards compatible.

When Tcl is compiled with -DTCL\_UTF\_MAX=4, this is at the Tcl level, compatible with the Androwish-version
of Tcl with one exception: In Androwish the "unicode" encoding is 32-bit, in Tcl it continues
to be 16-bit, an alias for "utf-16". At the C-API level, it's upwards compatible with Tcl 8.6 in
TCL\_UTF\_MAX=6 mode, except for the following 5 functions: Tcl\_NewUnicodeObj(), Tcl\_SetUnicodeObj(),
Tcl\_GetUnicode(), Tcl\_GetUnicodeFromObj() and Tcl\_AppendUnicodeToObj(). Using any of those 5 functions
will result in a panic if the extension is compiled in a different mode than Tcl.

# Caveats

 * If Tcl is compiled with -DTCL\_UTF\_MAX=3, extensions compiled with -DTCL\_UTF\_MAX=4 and which use the
   Tcl\_UniChar type won't work. This will result in a panic, as soon as one of the 32-bit
   Tcl\_UniChar functions is called.

 * Internally, there is only one "Unicode" Tcl\_Obj-type. This means that any extension using
   Tcl\_NewUnicodeObj(), Tcl\_SetUnicodeObj(), Tcl\_GetUnicode(), Tcl\_GetUnicodeFromObj() or
   Tcl\_AppendUnicodeToObj() MUST be compiled in the same mode as Tcl. Otherwise, a panic results
   as soon as one of those functions is called.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is available in  the **utf-max** branch.
<https://core.tcl.tk/tcl/timeline?r=utf-max>

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
