# TIP 546: Typedefs to Support Source-Compatible Migration
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        20-May-2019
	Keywords:       Tcl, traces
	Post-History:
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes new typedefs for the public interfaces of Tcl 8.7
and Tcl 9.0 to permit single-source-code extensions to be compiled
and loaded in the ecosystem of each major Tcl release.

# Background

Implicit constraints of many public Tcl routines have come to annoy
programmers more and more as the years go by. Notably size limits
prevent Tcl programs making full use of the resources of platforms
that are utterly conventional today. Many TIPs for Tcl 9 directly
call for new, binary-incompatible routines to overcome these limits.
(Add references here).

The careful definition of typedefs can parameterize many of the
changes needed, and in the process create tools for writing extensions
with source code that bridges compatibility with both the Tcl 8 and
Tcl 9 releases, and which can also assist with portability testing of
the suitability of Tcl 9 on 32-bit platforms, even as fewer and fewer
developers have routine access to them.

This TIP is in the **Draft** State, but it truly is in Draft form.
Comments and contributions are actively encouraged.

# Rationale

The following set of typedefs are useful for Tcl interface migration
support:

## Tcl_Size

Many arguments to public Tcl routines characterize the size of some
other argument in terms of a count of smaller components it contains.
Any argument like this needs to have a type that meets several criteria.

 * It should be an integral type of the C language, so that basic
   operations of comparison and arithmetic are available in expected ways.

 * The value *0* must be included in the type **Tcl_Size** so that empty
   containers can be described.

 * A value *TCL\_SIZE\_MAX* must be defined, indicating the largest size value
   included in the **Tcl_Size** type.

 * All values between *0* and *TCL\_SIZE\_MAX* are also supported as meaningful
   sizes in the **Tcl_Size** type.

 * Another value *TCL\_SIZE\_UNKNOWN*, distinct from all those mentioned so far,
   is also included in the type **Tcl_Size** as a way to indicate lack of
   knowledge or specification of a size.  This is analogous to the **NULL**
   value for pointers.

## Tcl_Idx

# Specification

# Compatibility

# Reference Implementation

Will be drafted in [tip-546](/tcl/timeline?r=tip-546) branches.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
