# TIP 551: Permit underscore in numerical literals in source code
    Author:        Eric Taylor <tips@rocketship1.me>
    State:         Draft
    Type:          Project
    Vote:          Pending
    Created:       16-Sep-2019
    Post-History:
    Tcl-Version:   8.7
    Tcl-Branch:    tip-551
    Keywords:      numbers, readability
    Sponsor:       Brian Griffin <brian_griffin@mentor.com>

# Abstract

This TIP proposes that all numbers in scripts shall allow digit
separators in the form of underscore characters for readability of
code.

# Rationale and Discussion

In most modern programming languages, it is possible to group the
digits in the program's source code to make it easier to read; Ada, C#
(from version 7.0), D, Haskell (from GHC version 8.6.1), Java, OCaml,
Perl, Python (from version 3.6), Ruby, Rust, and Swift all allow use
of a digit seperator character, specifically the underscore (`_`)
character, for this purpose. All these languages allow nine hundred
million to be entered as `900_000_000`.

This TIP proposes to change TCL to include this ability.

# Specification

To allow underscore in all numerical constants (decimal, octal,
0x... 0b... 0d... 0..., and real numbers) the underscore character
would be simply an aid to visibility. This character would serve as a
comment in the sense it would be allowed in the program source code
but have no semantic affect. Any number of underscores would be
allowed and their positions would be unrestricted except where a
number would no longer be a number, i.e., as the first character.

For example,

    expr 100_000_000
    expr 0xffff_ffff
    expr 0b1111_1111_1111_1110

A number is identified in the routine `TclParseNumber` and scans the
text until the end of the number. It accepts several formats. The key
is that a number is a word that begins with a decimal digit and can
have several forms for decimal, octal, hexidecimal, binary, and real. The
convention currently is to use a 2 character prefix, 0x, 0b, 0o, and the
newest one, 0d. This proposal would allow an underscore following the
first digit or the letter that designates the number base, to anywhere
up to and including the end of the number. There can be multiple
underscores in a row.

Thus,

    0x_ffff_ffff_

would be legal and similarly with the other 3 bases supported.

The one restriction would be a number with a leading `_` as that would
change the meaning from a number to a bareword, e.g.

    expr _123

would not be allowed, since that would not be a number.

The implementation would be to simply bypass the `_` in all cases during
the processing of the number in the routine TclParseNumber.

A preliminary implementation was tested with 4 lines of code at the
beginning of the function. It is at the main while loop in
TclParseNumber and includes this,


    while (1) {
      char c = len ? *p : '\0';
    
      // ------------- add this to allow _ in a number and just bypass it
      if ( c == '_' ) {
        p++;
        continue;
      }
      // -------------- end of code to allow underscore
      ...
    }

# Implementation

See branch tip-551

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
