# TIP 552: Extended treeview functionality.
        Author:        Peter Spjuth <peter.spjuth@gmail.com>
        State:         Draft
        Type:          Project
        Vote:          Pending
        Created:       19-Sep-2019
        Post-History:
        Tcl-Version:   8.7
        Keywords:      Tk, treeview
        Tk-Branch:     pspjuth-treeview
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a set of new features for the Ttk treeview widget.

# Rationale

Each time I have tried to use the Treeview widget it fell short of some
feature or another and I had to resort to other means.

This aims to fill in the most common missing pieces.

# Specification

The following features are added to the treeview widget.

## Locked horizontal scrolling

Adds the ability to lock the first display column(s) from horizontal scrolling.

A new option **-titlecolumns** *n* is added, requesting columns to be locked.
The tree column counts, even if **-show tree** is not specified.
This is to follow the semantics of #N-indexing of columns.
Thus for value N of this option, column #N is the first one that is scrollable.

## Locked vertical scrolling

Adds the ability to lock the first item(s) from vertical scrolling.

A new option **-titleitems** *n* is added, requesting items to be locked.

Any individual item's visual appearance is not affected by this, just if it is shown
or not. Thus if a hierarchy crosses the titleitem boundary it looks weird but
works. If striped rows are used and the title items have default colors, it looks
weird but works.  Both those usages fall under "Don't do that then".

## Cell selection

Adds the ability to select individual cells as well as full rows.

Cell selection is independent of item selection.

Cells are identified with a two element list with item id and column id.

A new subcommand **cellselection** is added, mirroring the present **selection**.
In addition the **cellselection** commands get
a version with two arguments for selecting/modifying a rectangular range.
Only cells in displayed columns are allowed for rectangular selection.

Since for **selection** the itemList can also be a single item (by nature of
how lists work for simple values), this is also allowed for a cellList since
a two cell list can be clearly distinguished from the two element list that
is one cell.

Any change to **-columns** clears the cell selection to avoid ambiguous state.

A new option **-selecttype** *type* is added to direct default bindings to
use either item selection or cell selection. It takes values `item` or `cell`.

The **identify** subcommand is updated with the **cell** option.

Default bindings are updated to use these features.

The \<\<TreeviewSelect\>\> virtual event triggers on any selection change including cellselection.

## Striped rows

A new option **-striped** *bool* is added. This makes every other item to be
drawn with the **-stripedbackground** color, if that option is set by the
theme or tags.
Built in themes are updated to put something fitting at that color.

## Column separators

The **-show** option is extended with the value `columnseparators` to
display a separator between columns.
Built in themes are updated to define the separators.

## Image anchor for tree

A new item option **-imageanchor** *anchor* is added.
This controls the placement of the image relative to the text in an
item's tree column. Default is "w".
For tags, **-imageanchor** work like **-image**, i.e. if not set in the
item, it can be set by tags.

## Item height

A new item option **-height** *height* is added.
This controls the height of the item, in multiples of **-rowheight**. Default is 1.

# Rejected alternatives

## Striped rows

An earlier spec implemented **-striped** as an alternate state. This did not
work well, since options are resolved in a certain order. Style defaults,
tags, then Style maps. Since alternate was part of the style maps, it overrode
any background in tags. The striped background should have less priority than
tags, and be at the level of Style defaults.
Thus it was moved to a **-stripedbackground** option.

# Implementation

Started on branch [`pspjuth-treeview`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/timeline?r=pspjuth-treeview)

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
