# TIP 554: Library file system for Tcl and Tk core using an C-based VFS
	Author:         Sean Woods <yoda@etoyoc.com>
	Author:         Roy Keene
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        14-Nov-2019
	Tcl-Version:	8.6
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-554
-----

# Abstract

This tip proposes storing the /library file systems for both the Tcl core and Tk core
as C data structures presented as a virtual file system.

# Rationale

In Tip430 we explored the various issues with integrating a Zip based file system into
interpreter initialization. While this process is finished and largely working, there
are some awkward workarounds to manage the process of Zipfs encoding on exotic platforms.
Some of these workaround involve forgoing the tip entirely.

While the use of Zipfs as the VFS of record seems to be somewhat controversial, performance
gains from not having to access (and explor) the local file system for every interpreter
startup are measurable.

There is also the problem of having to expose the /library system (as built) to kit builders
who have to copy it into a designated location in order for the Tcl core and Tk to start
properly.

What would be ideal is if the /library file systems were part and parcel with the core
libraries themselves.

# Implementation

A script will read the Library file system, end encode it into a bespoke virtual file
system implementation implemented in a single C file. That C file (tentatively named
tclLibraryCvfs.c) will be placed in the generic/ file system, and compiled and linked
along with the rest of the core.

The current process of discovering the location of init.tcl (for tcl) or tk.tcl (for Tk)
will be replaced with the process of mounting this VFS, thus exposing it's contents to
the interpreter.

Work for this project exists as the tip-544 branches of both Tcl and Tk. The tip-544 branch
for Tcl is an offshoot of core-8-6-branch. The Branch for Tk is an offshoot of core-8-branch.

# Maintenance

This C file will be maintained in a similar manner to the Stubs table. However, because
the data contained is largely a copy, this file will not be tracked in Fossil. Distribution
tarballs will contain a copy, but developers who work from fossil checkouts will have to
periodically re-run the script. A makefile directive will be included to generate the file
if it is missing, and "make genstubs" will replace it.

# Specification

This system provides no external function calls on the script level, nor does it require
adding new functions or modifying existing functions to either the public or private
API of Tcl or Tk.

## VFS Mount Point

The VFS implementation will advertise itself as //library:/core/tcl for the Tcl library system
and //library:/core/tk for the Tk library system. Packages which need to utilize a similar
technology are encouraged to adopt //library:/pkg/PACKAGE_NAME. It is intended that these
file systems be small enough that keeping them memory resident will not impact the performance
of a general purpose computer.

# Installation changes

The Tcl and Tk installers will no longer need to provide a copy of the /library file system
during installation. This process will be removed.

# Memory Usage

On platforms that Tcl typically runs on, blocks of constants are kept in virtual memory,
and are not loaded into working RAM. However, some primitive working environments may
try to load these C constants into working RAM. The library file system of Tcl is current
4.3 mb (as determined by running tar cf, and measuring the file.) The library file system
of Tk is 1.7 mb. On a computer capable of running Tk, even loaded into working memory will
not even be a consideration. For an embedded system where every byte counts, we can leave
out encodings, and that reduces the size to 2.7mb.

# Backward Compatibility

The main area for concern for Compatibility issues is Tk. Tk can be compiled against Tcl
cores of various vintages, including those which are not equipped with the features of
this tip. Because the VFS for Tk is self contained, and distributed by virtue of being
compiled into the library itself, for most users there will be no change. (Save, of course,
for the improved load time.)

Kit builders and speciality developers who provide their own library systems are still free
to populate their own values for tcl_library and tk_library and those contracts will still
be honored. The C-based VFS will only load if no other candidate to fill the role of the
/library file system has stepped forward by the time the interpreter initializes.

# Interactions with tip430

This tip only replaces the portions of tip430 dealing with interpreter initialization.
In all other respects the goals of this tip and non-startup goals of tip430 are parallel
to one another.

# Inspiration

This technology is influenced by Roy Keene's work with XVFS. It also draws on the lessons
learned from implementing tip430.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
