# TIP 556: Add oo like widgets to Tk
	Author:         René Zaumseil <r.zaumseil@freenet.de>
	State:         	Deferred
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        26-Nov-2019
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tk
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tk-Branch:      tip-556
-----

**This tip is deferred because I could not find a sponsor for it.**
 
# Abstract

This tip proposes to add the following oo class widget commands and functions to deal with options at the class and object level. A C function interface allows creation of new oo class like widgets.

## New oo::class like widgets

**::tko::toplevel** *pathName ?option value? ..*

**::tko::frame** *pathName ?option value? ..*

**::tko::labelframe** *pathName ?option value? ..*

> The new widgets will contain the same functionality like the original *tk* widgets. They are *oo:class*'s and it is possible to add,change and delete methods and options dynamically. The widgets could also be used as oo *superclass*'s.

> The interface functions to build new widgets in C are described in [`tko.3.md`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/doc/tip-556/doc/tko.3.md).

## Tcl class creation

**::oo::class create** *ooclass* { **::tko initclass** }

> The **tko initclass** function create on oo class with option handling.

**::oo::class create** *widgetclass* { **::tko initfrom** *tkoclass* }

> The **tko initfrom** function use *tkoclass* as superclass.

**::oo::class create** *widgetclass* { **::tko initwrap** *widget readonlyoptionlist ?commanlist?* }

> The **tko initwrap** function wraps an existing tk widget in an oo class widget.

## Class functions

To provide dynamic option management at class level exists a **::tko** function.

**::tko initclass**

**::tko initfrom** *?superclass?*

**::tko initwrap** *widget readonlyoptionlist ?commandlist?*

**::tko eventoption**

**::tko optiondef** *classname ?-option definitionlist? .. ?body?*

**::tko optiondel** *classname ?-option? ..* 

**::tko optionget** *classname ?-option? ..*

**::tko optionhide** *classname ?-option? ..*

**::tko optionshow** *classname ?-option? ..*

> A detailed description can be found in [`tko.n.md`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/doc/tip-556/doc/tko.n.md).

## Widget methods

To manage options on object level exists an **\_tko** method. 

**my \_tko optionadd** *-option definitionlist ?body?*

**my \_tko optiondel** *-option* ..

**my \_tko optionhide** *-option* ..

**my \_tko optionshow** *-option* ..

> A detailed description can be found in [`tko.n.md`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/doc/tip-556/doc/tko.n.md).

## Option definitionlist

In the *definitionlist* description below an entry with name *flags* can contain a combination of the following letters:

  - "r" the option is readonly and can only be set on creation
  - "h" The option is hidden from use in **cget** and **configure** methods.

The *definitionlist* can have one of the following forms:

  - *{-synonym flags}*

> Description of an synonym option. When *-option* is set then instead the provided *-synonym* option will be set.

  - *{dbname dbclass default flags}*

> Description of an option.
If *dbname* or *dbclass* is not empty then the values will be used to search for an default option value in the option database.
The search will need a **Tk\_Window** and therefore this definition can only be used in an widget class.
If both value are empty then the option definition can be used in an normal class create with **tko initclass**.
*default* is the default value if no value can be found in the option database.

# Rationale

Currently there is no megawidget support core package. These tip will go some steps in this direction. With widgets as **oo::class**'s we can easyly extent existing widgets, just use it as a superclass. The provided functions and methods allow add, delete and changing of options at class and object level. The implementation can be used in C and in Tcl.

# Implementation

A patch implementing these changes is available in the fossil
repository in the [tip-556 branch](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/timeline?r=tip-556).

## Documentation

Documentation is available in md-Format in the .../doc/ directory.

- [`tko.3.md`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/doc/tip-556/doc/tko.3.md) C interface
- [`tko.n.md`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/doc/tip-556/doc/tko.n.md) Tcl interface

## C interface

C-source interface files are in `.../generic/tko/`.  No functionality is currently exported.

- [`tkoWidget.h`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/doc/tip-556/generic/tko/tkoWidget.h) **Tko\_Widget** C functions and definitions.

- The Tko\_Widget\*() functions should be available for extensions.

- The Tko\_Widget\* enum and structures should be included in file "tk.h" 

## C sources

C-source code files are in `.../generic/tko/`. The new files are  added to the makefiles. The calls to the initialization functions are added in tkWindow.c

- [`tkoFrame.c`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/doc/tip-556/generic/tko/tkoFrame.c) **tko::frame**, **tko::labelframe** and **tko::toplevel** implementation
- [`tkoWidget.c`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/doc/tip-556/generic/tko/tkoWidget.c) **Tko\_Widget** function implementation

## Tests

Test files are available in the .../tests/tko/ directory.

- [`tkoFrame.test`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/doc/tip-556/tests/tko/tkoFrame.test) tests from the tk frame.test file plus additional **oo::class** related tests

To compare the speed of the new widgets you can run the test frame-30.1. It will compare normal tk, ttk and tko widgets.

# Examples

Ready to run tclkit binaries for Linux, Windows and Mac can be found [here](https://sourceforge.net/projects/kbskit/files/tip556/)

    #
    # Configurable object
    #
    oo::class create A {
      ::tko initclass
    }
    A create a1
    a1 configure ==>

    # Add class option
    ::tko optiondef A -o1 {o1 O1 v1 {}} {set tko(-o1) x}
    A create a2
    a2 configure
    ==> {-o1 o1 O1 v1 v1}

    # Add object option
    oo::define A method mycmd {args} {my {*}$args}
    a2 mycmd _tko optionadd -o2 {o2 O2 v2 {}} {variable tko; set tko(-o2) x}
    a2 configure
    ==> {-o1 o1 O1 v1 v1} {-o2 o2 O2 v2 x}

    #
    # Wrap an existing widget
    #
    oo::class create B {
      ::tko initwrap frame {-class -container -colormap -visual} {}
    }
    B .b
    lindex [.b configure] 0
    ==> {-background background Background SystemButtonFace SystemButtonFace}

    #
    # Create a new widget class.
    #
    oo::class create C {
      ::tko initfrom ::tko::frame
      constructor {args} {next {*}$args}
      destructor {next}
      method mycmd {args} {my {*}$args}
    }

    # Hide all inherited frame options
    ::tko optionhide C {*}[::tko optionhide C]
    ::tko optionshow C
    ==> -class -visual -colormap -container -borderwidth ...
    C .c
    .c configure
    ==>

    # Add a new option
    oo::define C method -o1 {} {puts $tko(-o1)}
    ::tko optiondef C -o1 {o1 O1 v1 {}}
    ::tko optionhide C
    ==> -o1

    # Add another option
    ::tko optiondef C -o2 {o2 O2 v2 {}} {puts $tko(-o2)}
    ::tko optionhide C
    ==> -o1 -o2

    # Add options at object level:
    C .c1
    .c1 mycmd _tko optionadd -o3 {o3 O3 v3 {}} {my variable tko; puts $tko(-o3)}
    .c1 configure
    ==> {-o1 o1 O1 v1 v1} {-o2 o2 O2 v2 v2} {-o3 o3 O3 v3 v3}

    # Show all frame options again
    .c1 mycmd _tko optionshow {*}[.c1 mycmd _tko optionshow]
    llength [.c1 configure]
    ==> 24

    # Intercept options
    oo::define C method -width {} {
        puts "[my cget -width]->$tko(-width)->[set tko(-width) 100]"
    }
    .c1 configure -width 1
    ==> 0->1->100

    # Use option database for styles:
    option add *background red
    grid [tko::frame .f] -sticky nesw
    grid [label .f.l -text abc]
    grid columnconfigure . 1 -weight 1
    option add *background blue
    tko eventoption
 
# Discussion

See also discussion at the [wiki](https://wiki.tcl-lang.org/page/Tip+556%3A+Add+oo+like+widgets+to+Tk).

# Open issues

- Export functionality from `tkoWidget.h`

- The following function from `tkoWidget.c` should be an tcl oo function (tcl rfe 3ff0e9c37):
    Tcl_Obj *Widget_GetClassName(Tcl_Interp * interp,Tcl_Object object)

- Is it necessary to translate the documentation into man format?

- It is currently not possible to use unique abbreviations of class method names p.e. "frame .f; .f conf" A workaround would be to add all those method names. May be this can be solved in tcl oo directly?

- An oo widgets needs more time to create then an normal tk widget, nearly the same time to call functions and less time to destroy. But the time is comparable to tko widgets (see in tests/tko/tkoFrame.test test frame-30.1). This needs some investigation. The authors current assumption is the time is spent in calling "**my** *-option*" methods from inside C. Currently **Tcl\_EvalObjv()** is used. Are there better ways?

- The implementation of tko::toplevel has one hack. In tkWinMn.c 
  tkWinWM.c will call TkInstallFromMenu() from file tkFrame.c for toplevels.
  Inside these function a struct Frame and memeber menuName will be used.
  We have to ensure that our structure has the same form as Frame.
  Therefore we place some dummy arguments in the structure.


# Alternatives

- See tip-558 and tip-560 here.

- Use one of the existing megawidgets implemented in tcl.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

