# TIP 557: C++ support for Tcl
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        13-Dec-2019
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       Tcl
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     cplusplus
	Vote-Summary:	Accepted 2/0/3
	Votes-For:	JN, KW
	Votes-Against:	none
	Votes-Present:	DGP, FV, SL
-----

# Abstract

Every once in a while there is a request to be able to compile Tcl with a C++ compiler. This
would - in theory - allow C++ exceptions thrown by extensions to be handled by Tcl. This TIP
is _NOT_ about adding any code to Tcl doing that. But - as a first step - at least, Tcl needs
to compile well with a C++ compiler even though we don't use any C++ features.

This TIP proposes making Tcl compilable with a C++ compiler, without actually
using any C++ features.

# Implementation

The Tcl source-code has been strictified in the following ways:

 * No C++ keywords are allowed any more, such as `new` or `class`, for variable names.

 * No automatic casts from `(void *)` to other types any more, so all malloc's must be
   preceded by a type casts. And a `clientData` variable cannot be assigned directly
   any more to a variable of another type. This situation requires a type cast from
   now on in the Tcl core.

 * All core C-code now compiles warning-free when using the (gcc) options
   `-Wall -Wextra -Wwrite-strings -Wpointer-arith`.

 * Travis build sections are added, which compile Tcl with g++ (UNIX/Windows). So,
   any future commit which violates C++ compilation will lead to a failed build.

Nothing is done yet in the Tcl code to handle C++ exception, neither is any of the
API now available as C++ classes.

Tk has a `cplusplus` branch as well, doing the same. This work is complete for
UNIX, but not yet for Windows and MacOS.

# Caveats

C++ is more strict in using enum's than C is. Enums cannot be stored in
ints (and reverse) without type casts in C++. Tcl doesn't use enums, but there
was one external API function (in ttk) which actually used enum but
its argument in the public API was int: `Ttk_GetOrientFromObj`.
This TIP deprecates `Ttk_GetOrientFromObj`, and adds a new internal
function `TtkGetOrientFromObj` with the correct signature. I didn't
find any extension using `Ttk_GetOrientFromObj`.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
