# TIP 558: Basic Configure Support for TclOO
        Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
        State:          Draft
        Type:           Project
        Vote:           Pending
        Created:        22-Dec-2019
        Post-History:
        Tcl-Version:    8.7
        Keywords:       Tcl, TclOO, properties
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a basic mechanism for implementing a `configure` method
suitable for implementing simple properties such as are found in the
`chan configure` command (while also supporting inheritance). It does _not_
provide the mechanism needed for the more sophisticated `configure`/`cget` of
a Tk widget.

# Rationale and Design Considerations

A common requirement for user objects that work like existing Tcl subsystems
is that they support a way of being configured. There are many ways that such
configuration systems can work, but the two most well known are probably:

1. The channel configuration system (as in `chan configure`/`fconfigure`).

2. Tk widgets.

Long term, we want to support _both_ methods of working; that means that we
will need new classes to introduce the capabilities required. The former can
be a "configurable" class, and the latter can be a "widget" base class (and
which is Out Of Scope for this TIP other than to note that this TIP is _not_
attempting to support it).

Channel configuration is relatively simple, in that no attempt is ever made to
make changes transactional, and one command (or one public method) handles all
access. Each configurable property of a channel can be read-only, read-write
or write-only; most properties are read-write but some are not (e.g.,
the **-ttycontrol** option of serial channels is write only, and
the **-error** option of socket channels). If we provide fundamental mechanism
for getting the list of all readable and writable properties (read-write
properties would appear in both) while taking into account the inheritance
graph, then we can use those lists to also do things like short form expansion
and general error message generation.

Objects that provide a property must have the ability to run code in response
to being asked to read or write (as appropriate) that property. This could
theoretically be done through appropriate traces on variables, but I think it
is easier to implement properties by calling (presumably unexported) methods
that can read and write whatever internal state is required, as well as doing
any validation of the provided value required for settable properties (with
the good side-effect of meaning that custom error messages are trivial to
implement).

# Specification: Basic Support

Classes and objects will gain two extra slots each, being the list of readable
properties and the list of writable properties of the class or object. (These
slots represent sets; just as with `variable` slots, the order of the elements
in the slots will not be important, but a uniqueness constraint will be
enforced so that no element can be in a slot twice.) The slot configuration
commands will be placed in the namespaces `::oo::configuresupport` (which is
otherwise just an ordinary namespace): they will be:

 * `::oo::configuresupport::readableproperties` for configuring the slot
    listing readable properties of a class.
 * `::oo::configuresupport::writableproperties` for configuring the slot
    listing writable properties of a class.
 * `::oo::configuresupport::objreadableproperties` for configuring the slot
    listing readable properties of an instance.
 * `::oo::configuresupport::objwritableproperties` for configuring the slot
    listing writable properties of an instance.
 
There will be also related `info` subcommands:

 * **info class property** _cls_ ?_options..._?

    This will report the properties for a (prototypical instance of the) class
    given by _cls_, reporting the readable ones by default, and the writable
    properties if the option **-writable** is given (and the
    option **-readable** may be given instead to explicitly get the default
    behaviour). By default it will report only the properties registered on
	the current class; the ones on the full class hierarchy up to the class
	are obtained by passing the option **-all**.
 
    The reported list will be sorted, as if by `lsort -ascii -unique`.
 
 * **info object property** _obj_ ?_options..._?

    This is similar, but instead applies to a particular object, _obj_. It may
    include properties set on just the object instance.

It should be noted here that the presence of a property in one class or
instance does not prevent it from being listed by another class or instance,
and that the listing of a propertty name in either slot does not actually
guarantee that the property will be handled by the class that declares it; it
is merely convention that it does so. There is also no way for a class or
instance to prevent a property from being exposed once a superclass has
decided to expose it.

# Specification: Interface for Ordinary Scripts

Making use of these basic capabilities (themselves intended to be usable with
other configuration mechanisms out of the scope of this TIP or entirely) will
be a new class, `::oo::configurable`, which will provide the implementation of
the `configure` method (the only method it provides) and (via
[TIP #524](524.md) capabilities) the user visible `property` declarations.
This class will be written in pure Tcl.

## Configure Method

The `configure` method provided by `::oo::configurable` will support three
modes of operation:

 1. _obj_ **configure** —
 
    This returns a dictionary of all readable properties from the _obj_
    instance, its class and superclasses and all mixins, and their values.

 2. _obj_ **configure** _-prop_
 
    This returns the value of readable property _-prop_.
	
 3. _obj_ **configure** _-prop value_ ?_-prop value_...?
 
    This updates each writable property _prop_ with its associated value,
    _value_, in the order given.

In all cases, the name _-prop_ can be abbreviated provided it is unambiguous.
The definitive list of property names is that provided by asking `info object
property` with the `-all` option and the appropriate mode flag. The
`configure` method will handle the disambiguation.

When `configure` determines that it wishes to read a property, `-prop`, it
delegates the actual reading of the property to a method, `<ReadProp-prop>`
(e.g., for a property `-foo`, the method will be `<ReadProp-foo>`) which is
assumed to take no extra arguments and return the value of the property. Any
error produced by this method (or a `break` or `configure` result) will result
in `configure` producing an error; for errors, the message will be identical.

When `configure` determines that it wishes to write a property, `-prop`, it
delegates the actual writing of the property to a method, `<WriteProp-prop>`
(e.g., for a property `-foo`, the method will be `<WriteProp-foo>`) which is
assumed to take one extra argument that is the value to write. Any error
produced by this method (or a `break` or `configure` result) will result in
`configure` producing an error; for errors, the message will be identical.
Successful results will be ignored.

Note that the property reader and writer methods described above are ordinary
methods subject to normal override rules, and will likely be non-exported
methods by default.

## Property Declarations for Classes

When a class is a subclass of `::oo::configurable` (or has it mixed in), it
will have an extra declaration:

 * **property** _name_ ?_-option value_...?

This will declare a property on the class under definition that can be
configured by the instances of that class. The property will be named with a
single minus sign preceding it (e.g., `property foo` creates something that
can be configured as `-foo`). It will be an error for _name_ to begin with a
`-` character.

## Property Declarations for Instances

When an object is an instance (direct or indirect) of `::oo::configurable` (or
has it mixed in), it will have an extra declaration:

 * **property** _name_ ?_-option value_...?

This is much the same as when classes are configurable, except that it applies
the property definition changes to the instance.

## Property Definition Options

The _-option_ arguments (and their values) of property definitions modify how
the property works. In particular, these options are supported:

 * **-kind** _propType_

    This makes the property be readable, writable or read-write, depending on
    whether _propType_ is **readable**, **writable** or **readwrite**
    respectively. If not specified, the property is read-write.

 * **-get** _methodBody_

    This allows you to specify the body of the implementation method for
    reading the property (whose name is derived from the property name as
    specified above) from the instances of the class or the object. If this
    option is not supplied and the property is of readable or read-write kind,
    a default will be used which just returns the contents of an instance
    variable with the same name as the property (without leading dash). No
    arguments will be supplied to the method.

 * **-set** _methodBody_
 
    This allows you to specify the body of the implementation method for
    writing the property (whose name is derived from the property name as
    specified above) in instances of the class or the object. The method will
    take a single argument, `value`. If this option is not supplied and the
    property is of writable or read-write kind, a default will be used that
    just stores the argument in the instance variable with the same name as
    the property (without leading dash).

In particular, this means that if one does:

    oo::class create Point {
	    superclass oo::configurable
	    property x
		property y
		constructor args {
		    my configure -x 0 -y 0 {*}$args
		}
	    variable x y
		method print {} {
		    puts "x=$x, y=$y"
		}
	}

You can then do:

    set pt [Point new -x 27]
	$pt print;   # x=27, y=0
	$pt configure -y 42
	$pt print;   # x=27, y=42
	puts "distance from origin: [expr {
	    hypot([$pt configure -x], [$pt configure -y])
	}]";         # distance from origin: 49.92995093127971
	puts [$pt configure]
	             # -x 27 -y 42

One of the main reasons for supplying a **-set** for a property is so that
invalid values can be rejected; the default code does not reject any values at
all. One of the main reasons for supplying a **-get** for a property is to
allow the value returned to be computed rather than just simply held in a
variable.

# Implementation

To be done

# Copyright

This document is placed in public domain.
