# TIP 559: Eliminate public routine `Tcl_FreeResult`
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Tcl-Version:    9.0
	Vote:           In progress
	Created:        13-Jan-2020
	Keywords:       Tcl, result 
	Post-History:
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes the fully official deprecation and elimination of
the public routine **Tcl_FreeResult**.

# History and Rationale

**Tcl_FreeResult** first appeared in release Tcl 6, as a companion
to the new routine **Tcl_SetResult**.  The purpose of **Tcl_FreeResult**
was to be a utility routine for managing the memory associated with
the _interp_->_result_ field of an interpreter, consistent with the
state of the interpreter left by the most recent call
to **Tcl_SetResult**. The utility spared the caller the burden
of examining _interp_->_freeProc_ for itself. Placing critical
housekeeping in a utility routine to be shared was a useful idea
compared with demanding every client of the Tcl API to do the same
for itself.

In Tcl 9, the field _interp_->_result_ is no longer available in the
public interface, so the original purpose of this utility routine no
longer has any value.

From the beginning **Tcl_FreeResult** has been documented

>	...It  frees  up the memory associated with interp's result
>	and  sets _interp_->_freeProc_ to zero, but it doesn't change
>	_interp_->_result_...

That is, the routine has explicitly been designed to leave an invalid
pointer in _interp_->_result_, a hazardous design. A subsequent call to
**Tcl_AppendResult** or **Tcl_AppendElement** would be expected to crash.
Over time as Tcl maintenance passed to coders other than the originators
of the hazard, even more crash scenarios arose in **Tcl_GetObjResult**
and **Tcl_GetStringResult**. To avoid such issues, a caller must
followup the **Tcl_FreeResult** call with either calls to **Tcl_ResetResult**,
**Tcl_SetResult**, or their own direct write to _interp_->_result_. The
last of these is no longer permitted, and the other two already have the
same housekeeping included in them that **Tcl_FreeResult** provides. There
is no longer a scenario where the **Tcl_FreeResult** provides value.

Starting in release Tcl 8.0, the documentation described **Tcl_FreeResult**
as deprecated. Arguably that documented pre-TCT record could be enough
direction, but this TIP is offered anyway to be completely clear, and in
recognition of the fact that other deprecation steps such as marking
in the stub tables have not yet been taken.

# Specification

In Tcl 9, remove the routine **Tcl_FreeResult** from code and
documentation.

In Tcl 8.7, mark the routine as deprecated in code and documentation.

# Compatibility

It is likely that any existing caller of **Tcl_FreeResult** is also
still making direct access to _interp_->_result_ and the same revision
work will address both issues. Any callers of **Tcl_FreeResult** that
are not in that scenario should be able to replace their **Tcl_FreeResult**
calls with **Tcl_ResetResult** calls.

# Reference Implementation

See branches [tip-559](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?t=tip-559).
and [tip-559-dep](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?t=tip-559-dep).

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
