# TIP 56: Standardize Call Interface to Tcl_Eval* Functions
	State:		Final
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.4
	Vote:		Done
	Post-History:	
	Author:		Miguel Sofer <msofer@users.sourceforge.net>
	Created:	28-Aug-2001
	Tcl-Ticket:	455151
-----

# Abstract

This TIP replaces _Tcl\_EvalTokens_ with _Tcl\_EvalTokensStandard_,
which obeys the standard result management conventions for script
evaluation functions.

# Rationale

The standard call interface for _Tcl\_Eval\*_ functions returns a Tcl
completion code \(TCL\_OK, TCL\_ERROR, TCL\_RETURN, TCL\_BREAK, or
TCL\_CONTINUE\), and sets a result object in the interpreter.  The
single exception is the function _Tcl\_EvalTokens_, that returns a
pointer to the result object, or a NULL when an exception occurs.
This effectively transforms all exceptions into errors.  This TIP
proposes to replace _Tcl\_EvalTokens_ with a new function
_Tcl\_EvalTokensStandard_ that performs the same chores but adheres
to the standard call interface.

There are two arguments for the replacement of _Tcl\_EvalTokens_:

   * Present a consistent call interface to all _Tcl\_Eval\*_
     functions.

   * Allow the return of non-error exceptional returns when evaluating
     tokens; the impossibility to do this is the cause of Bugs \#455151
\(<https://sourceforge.net/tracker/index.php?func=detail&aid=455151&group\_id=10894&atid=110894\)>
     and \#219384
\(<https://sourceforge.net/tracker/index.php?func=detail&aid=219384&group\_id=10894&atid=110894\)>

# Proposed Change

The proposal is to deprecate the use of _Tcl\_EvalTokens_ and replace
it with a new _Tcl\_EvalTokensStandard_. The core should only use the
new function, the old one remains only for backward compatibility with
extensions.

The proposal is implemented in the patch included in [Bug: 455151]
<https://sourceforge.net/tracker/index.php?func=detail&aid=455151&group\_id=10894&atid=110894>

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

