# TIP 560: Megawidget Configure/Property Support
        Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
        State:          Draft
        Type:           Project
        Vote:           Pending
        Created:        23-Jan-2020
        Post-History:
        Tcl-Version:    8.7
        Keywords:       Tk, TclOO, configuration, properties, options
        Tk-Branch:      tip-560
------

# Abstract

This TIP is a companion for [TIP #558](558.md) and builds upon the basic
facilities described in it; it describes how to build a configuration system
based on TclOO that can support making Tk megawidgets.

# Rationale and Design Requirements

Tk megawidgets should be a natural fit for TclOO, as Tk widgets have long
behaved like classes. However, configuration of Tk-like objects is quite
complex and has long been one of the most awkward parts for authors of
megawidgets, often leading to only partial implementations. It is also rather
different to the simple system described in [TIP #558](558.md). In particular,
options can be configured from defaults, from the option database, or
explicitly, and two methods, **configure** and **cget**, to handle scripted
access; **configure** returns an option descriptor when reading, whereas
**cget** just reads the value of the option. (Terminology note: Tcl has
_properties_ while Tk has _options_.)

It should be noted that this scheme is _necessarily semantically incompatible_
with the **configure** of [TIP #558](558.md); the results of **configure** are
entirely different, with one returning the property value itself and the other
returning an option descriptor (a short list); both mechanisms are present "in
the wild" so attempting to unify this is extremely difficult with how things
stand. Therefore it is a _non-goal_ of this TIP to design a system that can
allow an object to be accessed by both systems at once; that is never going to
work right.

There are also options that can only be configured during widget creation
(e.g., the **-use** option of toplevels and the **-class** option of quite a
few widgets) though all options are always readable. Another complexity is
that calls to **configure** are transactional; no changes are applied unless
all changes are applied (though a useless redisplay might be
triggered). What's more, any **-class** option needs to be handled early as it
changes how the configuration database is read from. (Indeed, this is omitted
from the standard mechanism, just as it is also handled specially in Tk frame
widgets and so on.)

Finally, there should be a mechanism for supporting aliases of options.

In support of this, we will want to support typing of options as this is a
common feature of Tk widgets. While there is a substantial set of standard
types (such as strings, colors, images, and screen distances) it is an open
set: we need a way of allowing user code to add custom types. A common custom
type is the table-driven type, where values must be chosen from a given list
of strings but can be abbreviated, so we should ensure that we provide special
support for that.

# Specification

Tk will supply a TclOO class, **tk::configurable**, that classes may inherit
from to gain a **configure** and a **cget** method, as well as a non-exported
**Initialise** method (that may only be called once; subsequent calls will do
nothing) intended to be used from constructors, and a non-exported
**PostConfigure** method intended as a point for user- and
subclass-interception. In addition, Tk will supply a metaclass,
**tk::megawidget**, that will allow the creation of definitions suitable for
configuration (that class may gain other behaviours in the future) with the
**option** declaration (note that this isn't the built-in **option** command,
but has the same name so that options are always called that). As with the
**oo::configurable** metaclass, option names will be given without leading
hyphens when they are specified.

    tk::megawidget create myLabel {
        superclass tk::configurable

        option label
        option borderwidth -type distance -default 1px \
            -name borderWidth -class BorderWidth
        option bd -alias borderwidth
    }

As we can see from this, we want to support some configuration properties for
an option. The full list (not fully shown above) is:

* **-name** *optName*

    This gives the name used for looking up a default in the option database.
    It defaults to the main name of the option with **string tolower** applied
    to it.

* **-class** *clsName*

    This gives the class name used for looking up a default in the option
    database (this is not a TclOO name). It defaults to the main name of the
    option with **string totitle** applied to it.

* **-default** *value*

    The default value of the option, used when no other default is available.
    Its default will depend on the type of the option (see below), but is
    usually either the empty string or a zero value. The default will be
    validated against the type.

* **-type** *typeName*

    The type of the value. The types will be subcommands of an ensemble (see
    **Option Types** below) that will provide defaults and validation. The
    default type will be **string**, which will do no validation and use a
    default that is empty.

* **-initonly** *boolean*

    Controls whether this is an initialisation only option. Initialisation
    only options may only be set by the **Initialise** method, and not by
    **configure**. (For example, real initialise-only options are the **-use**
    option of toplevels and the **-container** option of frames.)  Options are
    not initialisation only by default; this is expected to be a rare use
    case.

* **-alias** *optionName*

    Makes this option an alias for another option, which must exist at this
    point (for sanity's sake if nothing else). The other configuration
    properties to **option** (as described above) will be illegal if this is
    given. Note that alias options are not set by initialisation (unless
    explicitly provided), since their underlying option should be set instead.

The **configure** and **cget** methods will work in ways that should be
immediately recognisable to Tk users. There will also be a non-exported
**PostConfigure** method (taking no arguments) that will be called by
**configure** after any call that could have changed the state (no
determination will be done of whether the state actually changed); the default
implementation of **PostConfigure** will be empty, but it will provide a
convenient place to hook generation of events for state changes or validation
of the whole configuration (errors will trigger the same rollback behavior as
validation failures). It will be recommended (but out of the scope of this TIP
to implement) that idle events are used to combine state update events.

Initialisation will be done by calling the non-exported **Initialise** method,
which will take its first argument to be the widget path name (we do not
assume that this is the same as the object name) and an even number of
following arguments that will be the same as if for **configure**. The
initialisation will write _all_ elements of the array, using the information
from the option configuration and retrieved from the option database (see
**option get**), and is the only method that will write initialisation-only
elements. Note that this method is intended to be called from a constructor,
and will _not_ call the **PostConfigure** method or perform state rollback on
failure; the caller can do any system validation afterwards, and validation
failures are expected to abort widget creation altogether rather than rolling
anything back.

The **Initialise** method may only be called (successfully) once.

## Interaction with Fundamental TclOO and Tk Mechanisms

As all options are readable in Tk, all will be listed in the readable
properties of the class (see [TIP #558](558.md) for the Tcl mechanism for
this). Most options will also be listed in the writable properties of the
class, but initialisation only options will not. (Note once again: megawidgets
are not **oo:configurable** in the sense of [TIP #558](558.md), but they do
use the same basic TclOO mechanisms.)

The following methods will be created for each option (where _name_ is the
hyphen-removed version of the name):

* **<OptDescribe-**_name_**>** — takes no arguments and returns a description
  of the parts of the option descriptor that do not change. In particular,
  this is a list of three items for non-alias options; these are the option
  database name of the option, the option database class of the option, and
  the actual default value of the option. For aliases, this is a
  single-element list containing the name of the target option.

* **<OptValidate-**_name_**>** — takes a single value, checks whether the
  value is of the type of the option, and returns the normalized option value.
  Typically forwarded to the **validate** method of the option's type object.

* **<OptRead-**_name_**>** — how to actually read the option out of whatever
  storage it is implemented with. Takes no arguments and returns the current
  value of the option. Note that if a method exists with this name in the
  class, it is _not_ overridden by the **option** declaration; this makes
  providing implementations in C on a case-by-case basis relatively straight
  forward.

* **<OptWrite-**_name_**>** — how to actually write the option to whatever
  storage it is implemented with. Takes a single argument, the value to write
  (after validation and normalization). Return value is ignored.  Note that if
  a method exists with this name in the class, it is _not_ overridden by the
  **option** declaration; this makes providing implementations in C on a
  case-by-case basis relatively straight forward.

The _default storage mechanism_ for options will be the array in the object
instance with the empty local name (so the option `foo` will be in array
element variable `(foo)` in the instance namespace; this is a trick stolen
from stooop). This can be overridden by defining appropriate non-exported
methods, for which there are these implementations provided by default:

* **<StdOptRead>** — This method reads an element of the array. It takes a
  single argument, the full name of the element, and returns the value
  inside. It is never called with the name of an alias. (The
  **<OptRead-**_name_**>** methods described above delegate to this.)

  If an implementation provides custom readers for each option so that it goes
  to the right slot in a C structure, it does not need to provide an override
  of this method.

* **<StdOptWrite>** — This method writes an element of the array. It takes a
  two arguments, the full name of the element and the value to write. Its
  return value is ignored. It is never called with the name of an alias. (The
  **<OptWrite-**_name_**>** methods described above delegate to this.)

  If an implementation provides custom writers for each option so that it
  comes from the right slot in a C structure, it does not need to provide an
  override of this method.

* **<OptionsMakeCheckpoint>** — This method saves the state so that it may be
  restored. It takes no arguments and returns the saved state that can be used
  with **<OptionsRestoreCheckpoint>** _on the same class_ if required. The
  default implementation uses **array get**, but the method may be overridden;
  the only constraint is that whatever the checkpoint creator creates must be
  consumable by the matching checkpoint restorer. Any overriding
  implementation _should_ include the superclass's checkpoint state in its own
  checkpoint state (calling via **next**).

  If _any_ options are implemented with C backing store, an override for this
  method _should_ be provided. Note that this means that it is probably unwise
  to override this method and not **<OptionsRestoreCheckpoint>**.

* **<OptionsRestoreCheckpoint>** — This method restores a saved state created
  with **<OptionsMakeCheckpoint>**. It takes a single argument, the saved
  state. Its return value is ignored. The default implementation uses **array
  set**, but the method may be overridden. No attempt is made to validate the
  contents of a saved state. If overridden, the overriding implementation
  should also call the superclass's implementation (calling via **next**) to
  restore that portion of the checkpointed state.

  If _any_ options are implemented with C backing store, an override for this
  method _should_ be provided.  Note that this means that it is probably unwise
  to override this method and not **<OptionsMakeCheckpoint>**.

Note that **Initialise** requires an existing widget name. A consequence of
that is that any true initialisation-only options that need to be passed to
that widget must be manually parsed before the widget is created (_or_ the
widget can be created, used for parsing, and then destroyed and rebuilt with
the correct options; that's not too expensive if the temporary widget is never
mapped).

## Option Types

One key part of this specification is a system for typing of options, since it
is extremely common for Tk widget options to be constrained to be of
particular types. This will be done using an ensemble of type implementation
commands, **tk::OptionType**, with the member elements of the ensemble being
themselves ensemble-like (probably objects, but not necessarily), supporting
at least two subcommands, **validate** and **default**.

The **validate** subcommand will take a single argument, the value to be
validated, and will produce an error if the validation fails and return the
value to be actually set otherwise (to allow a value to be converted to
canonical form if desired). The **default** subcommand will take no arguments,
and return the default value usually associated with the type. (Note that
there is no need to make either of these commands aware of which class or
instance they’re being used with; types are independent of how they are used
and these defaults can be overridden when the option is created.)

For example, this will allow the validation of a proposed value, *$foobar*,
for an option of type *$gorp*, to be done by calling:

    tk::OptionType $gorp validate $foobar

The standard types will be:

* **string**: any string. Defaults to the empty string. Validation always
  succeeds on this type and never changes the value.

* **boolean**: value acceptable to **string is boolean -strict** (e.g.,
  **true** or **off**). Defaults to **false**.

* **zboolean**: empty string or boolean. Defaults to the empty string.

* **integer**: any integer (i.e., acceptable to **string is entier
  -strict**). Defaults to **0**.

* **zinteger**: any integer (as above) or empty string. Defaults to the empty string.

* **float**: any float (except NaN) acceptable to **string is double
  -strict**. Defaults to **0.0**.

* **zfloat**: any float (as above) or empty string. Defaults to the empty string.

* **distance**: any screen distance (as parsed by **winfo fpixels**). Defaults
  to **0px**.

* **image**: name of any Tk image, or empty string. Defaults to the empty string.

* **color**: any color (as parsed by **winfo rgb**). Defaults to **black**.

* **zcolor**: any color, or empty string. Defaults to the empty string.

* **font**: any font (as parsed by **font actual**). Defaults to **TkDefaultFont**.

* **relief**: any relief (**flat**, **groove**, **raised**, **ridge**,
  **solid**, or **sunken**) or unambiguous prefix. Defaults to **flat**.

* **justify**: any justification (**left**, **right**, or **center**) or
  unambiguous prefix. Defaults to **left**.

* **anchor**: any anchor (**n**, **ne**, **e**, **se**, **s**, **sw**, **w**,
  **nw**, or **center**) or unambiguous prefix. Defaults to **center**.

* **list**: any valid Tcl list. Defaults to the empty list (and empty string).

* **dict**: any valid Tcl dictionary. Defaults to the empty dict (and empty string).

The official mechanism for adding a new type will be via the class
**tk::optiontype**. Instances of that will automatically plug themselves
inside using their names, and will be implemented using a callback provided to
the constructor. This will result in a class definition (approximately) like
this:

    oo::class create tk::optiontype {
       constructor {default testCommand} {
          ... # trivial implementation that saves the params
       }
    
       method validate {value} {
          if {![{*}$testCommand $value]} {
             return -code error ... # error message generation
          }
          return $value
       }
    
       method default {} {
          return $default
       }
    
       self {
          # class-level definitions
       }
    }

In practice, things are more complex because there are three basic ways to
validate a value. In particular, there are types for which there are tests
that return a boolean, types for which there are parsers that error on
failure, and types that are driven by a table of permitted values. As such,
**tk::optiontype** is actually an abstract class and there are concrete
implementations of each of the validation options.

When a type is created with **tk::optiontype createbool**, a boolean test is
expected to be provided as a command fragment that takes a single extra
argument. An example of the use is this, which makes the **boolean** type
described above:

    tk::optiontype createbool boolean "false" {
        string is boolean -strict
    }

When a type is created with **tk::optiontype createthrow**, the test instead
is expected to throw an error on failure. Because this can be more complex, we
assume that the value being tested is passed in the (local) variable
`$value`. An example of the use is this, which makes the **distance** type
described above:

    tk::optiontype createthrow distance "0px" {
        winfo fpixels . $value
    }

When a type is created with **tk::optiontype createtable**, the test is
driven by **tcl::prefix match** and all the caller has to do is supply the
table. An example of this one is:

    tk::optiontype createtable justify "left" {
        center left right
    }

It is up to the caller to ensure that each type's default values actually pass
validation checks.

Note that all of the types above are created with unqualified names; the names
are mangled internally by the above methods so that they plug in correctly
into the **tk::OptionType** ensemble. This is implemented using the unexported
**Create** method of **tk::optiontype**, for example like this:

    method Create {realClass name args} {
        # Condition the class name first
        set name [namespace current]::[namespace tail $name]
        # Delegate to the concrete subclass's create method
        tailcall $realClass create $name {*}$args
    }

    forward createbool   my Create ::tk::BoolTestType
    forward createthrow  my Create ::tk::ThrowTestType
    forward createtable  my Create ::tk::TableType

# Implementation

See the [`tip-560`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/timeline?r=tip-560) branch.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain.
