# TIP ???: Megawidget Configure/Property Support
        Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
        State:          Draft
        Type:           Project
        Vote:           Pending
        Created:        23-Jan-2020
        Post-History:
        Tcl-Version:    8.7
        Keywords:       Tk, TclOO, properties
------

# Abstract

This TIP is a companion for [TIP #558](558.md); it describes how to build a
property system based on TclOO that can support making Tk megawidgets.

# Rationale and Design Requirements

Tk megawidgets should be a natural fit for TclOO, as Tk widgets have long
behaved like classes. However, configuration of Tk-like objects is quite
complex and has long been one of the most awkward parts for authors of
megawidgets, often leading to only partial implementations. It is also rather
different to the simple system described in [TIP #558](558.md). In particular,
properties can be configured from defaults, from the option database, or
explicitly, and two methods, **configure** and **cget**, to handle scripted
access; **configure** returns a property descriptor when reading, whereas
**cget** just reads the value of the property.

It should be noted that this scheme is _semantically incompatible_ with the
**configure** of [TIP #558](558.md); the results of **configure** are entirely
different, with one returning the property value itself and the other
returning a property descriptor (a short list); both mechanisms are present
"in the wild" so attempting to unify this is extremely difficult with how
things stand. Therefore it is a _non-goal_ of this TIP to design a system that
can allow an object to be accessed by both systems at once.

There are also properties that can only be configured during widget creation
(e.g., the **-use** option of toplevels and the **-class** option of quite a
few widgets) though all properties are always readable. Another complexity is
that calls to **configure** are transactional; no changes are applied unless
all changes are applied (though a useless redisplay might be
triggered). What's more, any **-class** option needs to be handled early as it
changes how the configuration database is read from. (Indeed, this is omitted
from the standard mechanism, just as it is also handled specially in Tk frame
widgets and so on.)

Finally, there should be a mechanism for supporting aliases of properties.

In support of this, we will want to support typing of properties as this is a
common feature of Tk widgets. While there is a substantial set of standard
types (such as strings, colors, images, and screen distances) it is an open
set: we need a way of allowing user code to add custom types. A common custom
type is the table-driven type, where values must be chosen from a given list
of strings but can be abbreviated, so we should ensure that we provide special
support for that.

# Specification

Tk will supply a TclOO class, **tk::configurable**, that classes may inherit
from to gain a **configure** and a **cget** method, as well as a non-exported
**Initialise** method (that may only be called once; subsequent calls will do
nothing) intended to be used from constructors, and a non-exported
**PostConfigure** method intended as a point for user- and
subclass-interception. In addition, Tk will supply a metaclass,
**tk::megawidget**, that will allow the creation of definitions suitable for
configuration (that class may gain other behaviours in the future). As with
the **oo::configurable** metaclass, property names will be given without
leading hyphens when they are specified.

    tk::megawidget create myLabel {
        superclass tk::configurable

        property label
        property borderwidth -type distance -default 1px \
            -name borderWidth -class BorderWidth
        property bd -alias borderwidth
    }

As we can see from this, we want to support some options for a property. The
full list (not fully shown above) is:

* **-name** *optName*

    This gives the name used for looking up a default in the options
    database. It defaults to the main name of the property with **string
    tolower** applied to it.

* **-class** *clsName*

    This gives the class name used for looking up a default in the options
    database (this is not a TclOO name). It defaults to the main name of the
    property with **string totitle** applied to it.

* **-default** *value*

    The default value of the option, used when no other default is
    available. Its default will depend on the type of the option (see below),
    but is usually either the empty string or a zero value. It is up to the
    caller to ensure that the default is legal for the type.

* **-type** *typeName*

    The type of the value. The types will be subcommands of an ensemble (see
    **Property Types** below) that will provide defaults and validation. The
    default type will be **string**, which will do no validation and use a default
    that is empty.

* **-initonly** *boolean*

    Controls whether this is an initialisation only property. Initialisation
    only properties may only be set by the **Initialise** method, and not by
    **configure**. (For example, real initialise-only properties are the
    **-use** property of toplevels and the **-container** property of frames.)
    Properties are not initialisation only by default; this is expected to be
    a rare use case.

* **-alias** *propertyName*

    Makes this property an alias for another property, which must exist at
    this point. The other options to **property** (as described above) will be
    illegal if this is given. Note that alias properties are not set by
    initialisation (unless explicitly provided), since their underlying
    property should be set instead.

The storage mechanism for properties will be fixed to be the array in the
object instance with the empty local name (so the property `foo` will be in
array element variable `(foo)` in the instance namespace; this is a trick
stolen from stooop). State saving and reloading (so that changes are
approximately transactional) will be done with **array get** and **array
set**, and will *not* go via the validation.

The **configure** and **cget** methods will work in ways that should be
immediately recognisable to Tk users. There will also be a non-exported
**PostConfigure** method (taking no arguments) that will be called by
**configure** after any call that could have changed the state (no
determination will be done of whether the state actually changed); the default
implementation of **PostConfigure** will be empty, but it will provide a
convenient place to hook generation of events for state changes or validation
of the whole configuration (errors will trigger the same rollback behavior as
validation failures). It will be recommended (but out of the scope of this TIP
to implement) that idle events are used to combine state update events.

Initialisation will be done by calling the non-exported **Initialise** method,
which will take its first argument to be the widget path name (we do not
assume that this is the same as the object name) and an even number of
following arguments that will be the same as if for **configure**. The
initialisation will write _all_ elements of the array, using the information
from the property configuration and retrieved from the option database (see
**option get**), and is the only method that will write initialisation-only
elements. Note that this method is intended to be called from a constructor,
and will _not_ call the **PostConfigure** method or perform state rollback on
failure; the caller can do any system validation afterwards, and validation
failures are expected to abort widget creation altogether rather than rolling
anything back.

## Interaction with Fundamental TclOO Mechanisms

As all properties are readable in Tk, all will be listed in the readable
properties of the class. Most properties will also be listed in the writable
properties of the class, but initialisation only properties will not.

_TODO: describe what internal methods are used to implement properties._

## Property Types

One key part of this specification is a system for typing of properties, since
it is extremely common for Tk widget properties to be constrained to be of
particular types. This will be done using an ensemble of type implementation
commands, **tk::PropType**, with the member elements of the ensemble being
themselves ensemble-like (probably objects, but not necessarily), supporting
at least two subcommands, **validate** and **default**.

The **validate** subcommand will take a single argument, the value to be
validated, and will produce an error if the validation fails and return the
value to be actually set otherwise (to allow a value to be converted to
canonical form if desired). The **default** subcommand will take no arguments,
and return the default value usually associated with the type. (Note that
there is no need to make either of these commands aware of which class or
instance theyâ€™re being used with; types are independent of how they are used
and these defaults can be overridden when the property is created.)

For example, this will allow the validation of a proposed value, *$foobar*,
for a property of type *$gorp*, to be done by calling:

    tk::PropType $gorp validate $foobar

The standard types will be:

* **boolean**: value acceptable to **string is boolean -strict** (e.g.,
  **true** or **off**). Defaults to **false**.

* **zboolean**: empty string or boolean. Defaults to the empty string.

* **string**: any string. Defaults to the empty string.

* **integer**: any integer (i.e., acceptable to **string is entier
  -strict**). Defaults to **0**.

* **zinteger**: any integer (as above) or empty string. Defaults to the empty string.

* **float**: any float (except NaN) acceptable to **string is double
  -strict**. Defaults to **0.0**.

* **zfloat**: any float (as above) or empty string. Defaults to the empty string.

* **distance**: any screen distance. Defaults to **0px**.

* **image**: name of any Tk image, or empty string. Defaults to the empty string.

* **color**: any color (as parsed by **winfo rgb**). Defaults to **black**.

* **zcolor**: any color, or empty string. Defaults to the empty string.

* **font**: any font (as parsed by **font actual**). Defaults to **TkDefaultFont**.

* **relief**: any relief (**flat**, **groove**, **raised**, **ridge**,
  **solid**, or **sunken**) or unambiguous prefix. Defaults to **flat**.

* **justify**: any justification (**left**, **right**, or **center**) or
  unambiguous prefix. Defaults to **left**.

* **anchor**: any anchor (**n**, **ne**, **e**, **se**, **s**, **sw**, **w**,
  **nw**, or **center**) or unambiguous prefix. Defaults to **center**.

* **list**: any valid Tcl list. Defaults to the empty list (and empty string).

* **dict**: any valid Tcl dictionary. Defaults to the empty dict (and empty string).

The official mechanism for adding a new type will be via the class
**tk::propertytype**. Instances of that will automatically plug themselves
inside using their names, and will be implemented using a callback provided to
the constructor. This will result in a class definition (approximately) like
this:

    oo::class create tk::propertytype {
       constructor {testCommand default} {
          ... # trivial implementation that saves the params
       }
    
       method validate {value} {
          if {![{*}$testCommand $value]} {
             return -code error ... # error message generation
          }
          return $value
       }
    
       method default {} {
          return $default
       }
    
       self {
          # class-level definitions
       }
    }

The **tk::propertytype create** class method will be overridden to insert the
instance where it is needed (and will throw an error if any attempt is made to
override an existing type). It will still return the full name of the instance
to allow it to be used with **oo::objdefine** directly. It will also have a
helper class method, **createtable**, that produces a type whose values must
be picked from a table provided during creation time (with choices based on
what **tcl::prefix match** can disambiguate).

It is up to the caller to ensure that default values actually pass validation checks.

# Implementation

See the [`tip-???`]() branch.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain.
