# TIP 566: Index usage in lset
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Withdrawn
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        19-Feb-2020
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       lset
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     lset-index
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to change the `lset` command, such that situations previously resulting in an error result in a more logical outcome.

# Rationale

Commands like `string insert` and `linsert` are very flexible in how index underflow and overflow is handled. For example

<pre>
% linsert {a b c} 2 x
a b x c
% linsert {a b c} 100 x
a b c x
% linsert {a b c} -10 x
x a b c 
</pre>

We see that indices larger than the list size result in elements added at the end of the list.
While all negative indices result in elements added at the beginning.

`lset` does not have that flexibility:
<pre>
% set x {a b c}
% lset x 2 x
a b x
% lset x 3 y
a b x y
% lset x 4 z
list index out of range
% lset x -1 z
list index out of range
</pre>

# Specification

The function `Tcl_GetIntForIndex()` is modified such that for any index value resulting in a negative
number, value `-1` is returned. Also, any index value resulting in a number bigger than the list size
will result in exactly the list size. This means that all commands using `Tcl_GetIntForIndex()` will
automatically gain part the functionality as built-in by `linsert` and `string insert`.

Also, `lset` is modified not to consider index `-1` as an error, but duplicate the functionaly
as done for large indices: Using negative indices results in adding elements to the left side of the list.

New situation:
<pre>
% set x {a b c}
% lset x 2 x
a b x
% lset x 3 y
a b x y
% lset x 4 z
a b x y z
% lset x -1 z
z a b x y z
</pre>

# Compatibility

With this change, `lset` will not return the `list index out of range` error-message any more.
Any application depending on this error-situation will be affected.

# Implementation

See the [`lset-index`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?r=lset-index) branch.

This branch targets 8.7.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
