# TIP 567: Add Operation to Support Set-like Slots
        Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
        State:          Draft
        Type:           Project
        Vote:           In progress
        Created:        22-Feb-2020
        Post-History:
        Tcl-Version:    8.7
        Keywords:       Tcl, TclOO, slots
        Tcl-Branch:     tip-567
-----

# Abstract

This TIP adds an operation to slots to make it easier to manage slots that
have set-like semantics.

# Rationale

Some slots are very much like slots, in that repeated entries are forbidden.
Examples of this are the **superclass** slot of classes, and the **mixins**
slots of classes and instances. This matters because there is sometimes a need
to ensure that a particular value is in a slot without basing the operation on
whether the value is already there. It's possible, of course, to do this with
the existing operations, but the code to do so is moderately complex due to
the need to handle resolution of the class names; it's simpler to add the
operation to the slot itself.

This TIP fixes a subtle bug in the implementation of [TIP #500](500.md) found
during the development of the implementation of [TIP #560](560.md).

# Specification

The following method will be added to the class **::oo::Slot**:

  * _slot_ **-appendifnew** _arg..._

    Each _arg_ (of which there may be arbitrarily many) is appended to the
    slot, _slot_, if the _arg_ (after whatever resolution _slot_ normally
    applies) is not already present in the internal list maintained by _slot_.
    If any _arg_ is not a valid item for _slot_, an error message will be
    generated. The result will be the empty string on success.

The slots containing classes (specifically **superclass** and **mixin**, the
latter on both classes and instances) additionally gain the requirement that
their elements be unique within the slot.

# Implementation

The core of the implementation is simply this:

    method -appendifnew -export args {
        set my [namespace which my]
        set current [uplevel 1 [list $my Get]]
        foreach a $args {
            set a [uplevel 1 [list $my Resolve $a]]
            if {$a ni $current} {
                lappend current $a
            }
        }
        tailcall my Set $current
    }

The full implementation (including a number of bugfixes enabled by this) is on
the [`tip-567`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?r=tip-567) branch.

# Copyright

This document is placed in public domain.
