# TIP 568: Revise ByteArray Routines To Support Proper Value Extraction
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Accepted
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        4-Mar-2020
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       bytearray
	Tcl-Version:    9.0
	Tcl-Branch:	dgp-properbytearray, tip-568
	Vote-Summary:	Accepted 6/0/1
	Votes-For:	DP, KK, JN, SL, AK, KW
	Votes-Against:	none
	Votes-Present:	FV
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes revision of the public routines **Tcl_GetByteArrayFromObj**
and **Tcl_SetByteArrayLength** to signal an error when they are passed
an _objPtr_ that does not contain a valid byte sequence, starting with
Tcl 9.0.  It also proposes a new routine **Tcl_GetBytesFromObj** to
provide robust bytearray use in Tcl 8.7.

# Background

It is a convention of the Tcl C interface to have routines with names
like **Tcl_GetFooFromObj**. Their purpose is to extract a value in
the _foo_ representation from a (*Tcl_Obj* _*_) argument. The caller
should then be able to process the extracted _foo_ value 
confident that it represents the original *Tcl_Obj* value.
Each one of these routines is associated with one or more **Tcl_ObjType**s
such that multiple calls to **Tcl_GetFooFromObj** can benefit from
internal representation caching.

These routines follow one of three patterns. The first,

> _int_ **Tcl_GetFooFromObj**(*Tcl_Interp* _*_, *Tcl_Obj* _*_, ..., _foo *_);

is used when the *foo* representation is of fixed size that is not too large.
The _int_ return allows for returning **TCL_ERROR** when no valid *foo*
can be extracted. The *Tcl_Interp* is provided to receive standardized
error messages and codes on failure.  The final output argument is a pointer
to space where the extracted *foo* value may be written. The value written
is now in the possession of the caller, generated by the routine, possibly by
making a copy of something stored in the *Tcl_Obj*.  This pattern is followed
in the cases where **Foo** is **Boolean**, **Bignum**, **Double**,
**Encoding**, **Index**, **Int**, **Long**, or **WideInt**. (See also
private routines where **Foo** is **Channel**, **Number**, **CompletionCode**,
**WideBits**, or **Namespace**.)

The second pattern,

> _foo_ **Tcl_GetFooFromObj**(*Tcl_Interp* _*_, *Tcl_Obj* _*_, ...);

is used when the *foo* representation is a token that can take on
the value **NULL**.  In this case, a return of **NULL** by the routine
signals the circumstance that no valid *foo* can be extracted. As in
the first pattern, a *Tcl_Interp* is provided to receive standardized
error messages and codes on failure. Documentation must be consulted
to determine any constraints on the use of the returned token value by
the caller.  It is likely to rely on information stored within the internal
structures of Tcl, which may need management with reference counting,
memory preservation, and/or maintaining a claim on the original *Tcl_Obj*.
This pattern is followed in the cases where **Foo** is **RegExp**
or **Command**. (See also private routine where **Foo** is **Lambda**.)

The final pattern,

> _foo_ **Tcl_GetFooFromObj**(*Tcl_Obj* _*_, ***SIZE*** _*_);

is used when the returned *foo* is a pointer value pointing into
an array stored within Tcl's own structures.  It is implicit in the
structure of the interface that it is presumed this extraction cannot
fail. Thus there is no need to arrange for an interpreter to receive
error messages or codes. The caller is instructed that the return value
need not be checked for **NULL**. The final output argument is a pointer to
space where the length of the *foo* array returned may be written.  The
length value written is of type ***SIZE*** which may be either *int*
or *size_t* (see [[481]](481.md)).
Documentation must be consulted to determine the conditions under which
the caller may read, or even write to that array. This pattern is
followed in the cases where **Foo** is **String**, **Unicode**,
or **ByteArray**.

Again it must be understood that all of these routines have value only
so far as they provide a *foo* value that the caller can use in the place
of operating directly on the *Tcl_Obj*.  Experience has proven that
the existing specification of the routine **Tcl_GetByteArrayFromObj**
fails that test.

# History and Rationale

In Tcl 8.0, every Tcl string value was equivalent to an arbitrary sequence
of bytes.  Starting with release 8.1, the storage and transmission of Tcl
string values were revised to use a Modified UTF-8 encoding so that a larger
number of international character sets could be supported.  This created
two important facts pertaining to arbitrary binary data:
(1) For reliable binary transfer, we could no longer simply write arbitrary
bytes to a string representation; (2) General Tcl strings may contain
characters with codepoints outside the byte range (U+0000 - U+00FF).

The rules for encoding string values in Tcl 8.1+ created the need for a new
mechanism to accept, transmit, store, and produce arbitrary binary values,
preferably while minimizing the need to convert to other representations.
The _bytearray_ **Tcl_ObjType** was created to address this need. The
routine **Tcl_NewByteArrayObj** stores an arbitrary byte sequence in
a *Tcl_Obj*.  The routine **Tcl_GetByteArrayFromObj** can then retrieve
that same byte sequence.  When the string representation of such a value is
needed, each byte (with value from 0-255) in the sequence is encoded 
as the corresponding codepoint (U+0000 - U+00FF), and that codepoint sequence
is encoded in Modified UTF-8 in the usual way.  This strategy permits all
byte sequences to be encoded in a subset of Tcl string values. 

When **Tcl_GetByteArrayFromObj** is called on a value where no byte sequence
has been stored, a byte sequence is generated from the string representation.
When the string is in the subset of strings that can be produced by encoding
byte sequences, the decoding is clear. For other string values, those that
contain at least one codepoint greater than U+00FF, it was decided
that any larger codepoint in the string value would have its high
bits stripped away, and be decoded based on the contents of the low 8 bits
it contained.  Given this decision, all strings produce a byte sequence, and
**Tcl_GetByteArrayFromObj** would always return a non-NULL pointer to
a byte sequence. The routine did not need specify any mechanism
for raising errors.  This decision is the source of all the trouble.

When a caller of **Tcl_GetByteArrayFromObj** receives access to a byte
sequence, it does not know whether this is a sequence originally stored,
or one generated by transforming and possibly truncating characters from
a general Tcl string value.  This means the contents of the byte sequence
do not reliably reveal everything about the value.  We could not say,
for example, what the 3rd character in the value is. At best we could
say what is left when all high bits are stripped off that character.
It is not a common need to treat all string values according to
the equivalence classes established by examining only the low-bytes of
every character.

If we supplement the call to **Tcl_GetByteArrayFromObj** with a call
to **Tcl_HasStringRep**, we might learn that the value does not have
a string representation stored within it. In that case, the value is what
we have come to call a _pure_ bytearray value. We can then be sure the byte
sequence is an original one. It did not come from a string since there is
no string.  We can then use the byte sequence as the definitive value.
This helps, but only so much.
If anything causes the string representation to be generated, we lose this
supplementary test, and we are back to being unable to use the byte sequence
at all, unless our usage is exactly to operate on the value according to
the equivalence classes mentioned before.

This is tricky enough that many callers of **Tcl_GetByteArrayFromObj** get
it wrong, even the callers within Tcl itself.  See Tcl
bugs [0e92c404f1](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/info/0e92c404f1)
and [2637173](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/info/2637173) and this
interactive demonstration:

<pre>
```
>	% info patchlevel
>	8.5.15
>	% set s \u0141
>	Å
>	% binary scan $s c x
>	1
>	% string index $s 0
>	A
```
</pre>

In Tcl 8.5.16+ these bugs are fixed. In Tcl 8.5 and 8.6, the testing for
pure bytearray values is performed, so the wrong results are no longer
produced. However, this approach still loses all utility of byte array
internal representations as soon as a string representation is generated.
In Tcl 8.7, the internals have been reworked so that two distinct
**Tcl_ObjType**s are in use. One of these implements a proper byte array
**Tcl_ObjType** that rejects string values that contain any non-byte 
character. The other tolerates such strings, so that the behavior of
**Tcl_GetByteArrayFromObj** can be continued without any incompatibility.
This preserves as much safe utility of the type as can be achieved without an
interface incompatibility.

The next evolutionary step is to incompatibly revise the documented
interface for **Tcl_GetByteArrayFromObj** so that it can return **NULL**
and so that each caller is burdened with handling that possibility.
The routine **Tcl_SetByteArrayLength** has the same concerns and should
change in the same way.

With the plan to allow extraction of bytes from a value to fail, it
becomes clear in hindsight that a routine following the second pattern
would be more appropriate, so that Tcl can offer the service of generating
a standard error message and error code.

# Specification

In Tcl 8.7, create a new public routine,

> _unsigned char *_ **Tcl_GetBytesFromObj**(*Tcl_Interp* _*_, *Tcl_Obj* _*_,  ***SIZE*** _*_);

which attempts to extract a byte sequence representation of the value. If
the value contains any character outside the byte range, it does not have
a valid representation as a byte sequence. In that circumstance, the
value **NULL** is returned, and if the interpreter argument is not **NULL**,
standard error messages and codes are left in it. Otherwise, a pointer
to the byte sequence representation is returned (after creating it, if
necessary) and the number of bytes in the sequence is written to the
storage at the output pointer, if it is not **NULL**.  Using the techniques
from [[481]](481.md), the ***SIZE*** type holding the number of bytes may be
either *int* or *size_t* .

In Tcl 9.0, revise routines **Tcl_GetByteArrayFromObj** and
**Tcl_SetByteArrayLength** so that they return NULL whenever the value
is not a proper binary sequence.  Most callers will prefer to use
the routine **Tcl_GetBytesFromObj** instead to benefit from error message
and error code generation.

In Tcl 9.0, building on these changes in the internal supports for
arbitrary binary data, the commands **binary scan** and **binary encode**
are revised to reject arguments that are not valid binary data.  When
such a situation arises, it indicates a programming error.  These are better
detected and fixed than accommodated.

In Tcl 9.0, end registration of a **Tcl_ObjType** with the name **bytearray**.
Callers of **Tcl_GetObjType**("bytearray") must be prepared to receive
a **NULL** return value.

# Compatibility

Most callers of **Tcl_GetByteArrayFromObj** are probably buggy, at least
so far as they are not robust when operating on a value that is not
valid binary data.  If the programs are written so that invalid data
never reaches these calls, they will not experience any incompatibility.
Otherwise, the incompatibilities provide the tools needed to make the
code robust in that situation.

Most callers will want to switch to **Tcl_GetBytesFromObj** as soon as
they can start to require Tcl 8.7.  It is a better design for the job,
and it will not have futher incompatibilities when bridging into Tcl 9.

Any callers who cannot or will not adapt their code to
use **Tcl_GetBytesFromObj** will continue to have **Tcl_GetByteArrayFromObj**
that is substandard in exactly the same way it is now through all remaining
Tcl 8 releases.  Only the adoption of Tcl 9 will force them to change
their code, and that change will be nothing more than checking a return
value for **NULL**.

The incompatibilities in the values acceptable to **binary scan**
and **binary encode** in Tcl 9 will cause no trouble in well-programmed
code.  Only code that allows arbitrary strings to be passed as an argument
runs a risk of new errors, and such code is better discovered and improved.

# Reference Implementation

See branches [dgp-properbytearray](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?t=dgp-properbytearray) (9.0)
and [tip-568](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?t=tip-568) (8.7).

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
