# TIP 569: Eliminate Comments That Serve Lint
	Author:         Don Porter <dgp@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        6-Mar-2020
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       lint
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
        Vote-Summary:   Accepted 8/0/0
        Votes-For:      DP, JD, KK, KW, SL, FV, DF, JN
        Votes-Against:  none
        Votes-Present:  none
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes removal of comments that exist solely to serve the needs
of the lint program.

# Background

All evidence of the early history of Tcl development suggests the programming
tool **lint** was in common use.  The operations of the lint program can be
controlled by the presence of special comments in the source code such as

>	`/*ARGSUSED*/`

>	`/*VARARGS1*/`

>	`/*NOTREACHED*/`

Such comments appear in the Tcl source code, and have appeared in it
since at least release 2.1.

By all appearances, the maintenance of these comments has not been kept up.
Current work is finding and marking unused function arguments, and most
examples found are not in functions marked with the `/*ARGSUSED*/` comment.
If there are any lint users out there, they are keeping silent about our bitrot.

No one is using them. They are broken. Trying to restore them would take
ongoing effort to serve no one. We should just get rid of them.

(If these claims are mistaken, we should modify or reject this proposal.)

# Specification

Remove all comments `/*ARGSUSED*/` and `/*NOTREACHED*/` from the Tcl
source code for releases 8.7 and later.

# Compatibility

Will convert Tcl source code from serving the lint program poorly to
not attempting to serve the lint program at all. This will make any
people who run lint on the Tcl codebase unhappy, if any such people exist.

# Reference Implementation

Will be trivial if this plan is approved.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
