# TIP 573: Surrogates are invalid
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-573
-----
# Abstract

In Tcl 8.5 and 8.6, it is possible to specify "\\uD800" as valid character, and do reasonable things with it.
Actually, U+D800 is not a valid Unicode code point, so any operation on such value is "undefined behavior".
Surrogates are only allowed when Unicode characters are stored or transmitted as UTF16, and then a single
Unicode character behaves as 2 characters in storage or on-line. However, when translating back to UTF-8,
those 2 characters have to be merged back to a single Unicode character. They are unseparatable.

Tcl has always allowed this, but it's wrong. The UtfToUtf encoder should translate all characters in
the range \\uD800 - \\uDFFF to the replacement character \\uFFFD. Also using the form \\uD800 in
scripts should always behave the same as if \\uFFFD was specified. This way, any possible 'hack'
attempt, trying to insert invalid Unicode in Tcl, can be mitigated rapidly.

One exception to this has to be made. When using the escace sequence \\uD800\\uDC00, so a valid
combination of an upper and a lower surrogate, in a script, there is no harm in translating
that to the intended Unicode code point. In Tcl 8.6 and 8.7 there is no other way than that for
specifying Emoji. Allowing this, provides a upgrade path for existing scripts handling Emoji.
Starting with Tcl 8.7, the "\\UXXXXXX" escape sequence should be used for this.

# Specification

This TIP proposes:

* All escape sequences in the range "\\uD800" to "\\uDFFF" become illegal, starting with Tcl 8.7.
  They will not result in an error (since Tcl has no error-handling for escape sequences), but
  they will behave as if they are specified as "\\uFFFD" (the replacement character).
* For Tcl 8.7, one exception will be made. Escape sequence pairs like "\\uD800\\uDC00", so a
  combination of an upper surrogate immediately followed by a lower surrogate, will be translated
  to the corresponding Unicode code point. For Tcl 8.7, this usage will be deprecated but still
  possible. For Tcl 9.0, this usage will no longer be permitted.
* All Tcl_UtfTo\*() functions will also, when encountering the 3-byte UTF-8 sequence
  corresponding to this range, translate this directly to \\uFFFD.

# Rationale

Since the code-points for surrogates are marked "invalid" in the Unicode standard, it should
not be possible to use them in Tcl.


# Implementation

Implementation is in branch tip-573

# Discussion

See ticket [5dabd088ee].

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
