# TIP 574: Add a 'tag delete' command to the ttk::treeview widget
	Author:         Emiliano Gavilan <egavilan@fceia.unr.edu.ar>, Francois Vogel <fvogelnew1@free.fr>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        8-May-2020
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tk Ttk treeview tag
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tk-Branch:      tip-574
	Tk-Branch:      bug-1bb2f1d7ab
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to add a subcommand to the treeview widget <b>tag</b> command so that the user can delete tags.

# Rationale

The <b>ttk::treeview</b> widget features a <b>tag remove</b> command, which removes a tag from one or more treeview items. After tag removal from an item, the tag information is still available, which is desirable to be able to use this tag with other items, and/or to use it again later.

There is currently no way to completely delete a tag from a ttk::treview widget. This TIP proposes to add such a feature. The text widget does the same thing by providing two separate <b>tag delete</b> and <b>tag remove</b> subcommands.

# Specification

A new subcommand <b>tag delete</b> <i>tagName</i> is added. It deletes all tag information for the <i>tagName</i> argument. The command removes the tag from all items in the widget and also deletes any other information associated with the tag, such as bindings and display information. The command returns an empty string.


# Implementation

See the [`bug-1bb2f1d7ab`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/timeline?r=bug-1bb2f1d7ab&unhide) branch, aka [`tip-574`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/timeline?r=tip-574&unhide).

This branch targets 8.7.

# References

See also ticket [1bb2f1d7ab](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/info/1bb2f1d7ab).


# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
