# TIP 577: Enhanced index values for Tk
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        8-June-2020
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl index
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tk-Branch:      enhanced-index
	Vote-Summary    Accepted 5/0/1
	Votes-For:      BG, JN, KW, MC, SL 
	Votes-Against:  none
	Votes-Present:  KBK
-----

# Abstract

Various commands handle errors in "index" values differently. This TIP attempts
to treat the different uses of index values in Tk to a more uniform way, align
them better with index usage in Tcl.

The main feature of this TIP is to let Tk indices handle all forms of Tcl indices.
So "4+5" and "end-1" will now be accepted, just as any other form accepted by
`Tcl_GetIntFormIndex()` (See also TIP #544).

In addition, the empty string is accepted in Tk as valid index. It means the same
as `-1` so _not available_. In Tk this is more natural, since the default of many
options is already the empty string. The default value of the `-underline` option
becomes the empty string. Setting `-underline` to the empty string means
no underlining. This default value change will be only done when Tk is compiled
with Tcl 9 headers, in order to give applications more time to adapt to this
usage (see _Compatibility_ section below).

# Rationale

Some examples (Tk):
<pre>
$ wish8.6
% listbox .l
% menu .m
% .l index 0
0
% .l index none _(listbox doesn't know about `none`)_
bad listbox index "none": must be active, anchor, end, @x,y, or a number
% .m index none _(menu does know about `none`)_
none
% .m index 0
none
</pre>

We see that menu's have a different way to indicate _not available_ compared to other widgets.

A request is done already a long time ago, to make index handling in Tk more flexible.
See:  [`widgets indices enhancement`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/tktview?name=1ef1ae2177)
This TIP implements part of this request (only the `active-<integer>` form is not implemented.


# Specification

  * Tk indices (e.g. the value of the `-underline` option) will accept all forms
    accepted by `Tcl_GetIntFromIndex()`, and also the empty string. So
    `-underline end-1` means underline one character before the last one of the
    string. `-underline {}` means no underlining, the same as `-underline -1`.
  * Indices in menu's, which currently use `none` as default, will be changed to use
    the empty string as default. The use of `none` in menu's is now considered
    deprecated, but still supported as long as Tk is compiled with Tcl 8.x headers.
  * Start accepting the empty string as index for entries, listboxes, menus .....
    just as for button and menu-related `-underline` options. A new `TK_OPTION_INDEX`
    option is implemented, which is almost the same as `TK_OPTION_INT`, but in stead
    of only integers, accepts all those index forms as well. 
  * When Tk is compiled with Tcl 9 headers, the default `-underline` value becomes
    the empty string in stead of `-1`. When compiled with Tcl 8 headers, `-1` is still
    the default.
  * When Tk is compiled with Tcl 9 headers, all commands which currently report
    _not available_ as `-1`, will start returning the empty string in stead.

# Compatibility

When compiled with Tcl 8.x headers, this is almost 100% compatible. Except for
menu commands which currently use the inconsistent `none` keyword (see above example)
they will start using the empty string in stead (but `none` still works in Tcl 8.x).

Code can easily be made working in both Tcl 8.x and 9.x environments. Just don't
check against the value `-1` any more, but use the `< 0` check: Since comparing the
empty string with `0` in Tcl uses string compare, it gives the same result as
comparing `-1` with `0`. All Tk utilities and demo's are already modified to
do this check consistently.

# Implementation

See the [`enhanced-index`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/timeline?r=enhanced-index) branch.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
