# TIP 578: Death to TCL_DBGX
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Created:        10-June-2020
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl index
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     death-to-dbgx
-----

# Abstract

The _TCL\_DBGX_ variable should be removed and never spoken of again.

# Rationale

Copied verbatim from TIP #34 (which was never actually completed, apparently):

The most thoroughly evil part of the entire Tcl build process is the
_TCL\_DBGX_ variable used in _configure.in_, _Makefile.in_, and
_tclConfig.sh_.  The following quote from Brent Welch say it all:

 > _"The TCL\_DBGX manifestation is one of the worst /bin/sh quoting
   hell situations I have encountered."_

Presumably, the _TCL\_DBGX_ variable was introduced to support
building of debug vs. non-debug versions of Tcl and installing them
into the same directory.  That may have been a noble goal, but in
practice this indirection makes many parts of the build system
extremely difficult to modify.  This scheme also fails to deal with
other identifying suffixes like 's' for a static build or 't' for a
threaded build.  A number of queries as to the usefulness of
_TCL\_DBGX_ have appeared on news:comp.lang.tcl but none produced
satisfactory results.  The _TCL\_DBGX_ variable should be removed and
never spoken of again.

# Specification

  * Remove _TCL\_DBGX_ really everywhere, starting with Tcl 9.0.
  * In unix/tclConfig.sh, win/tclConfig.sh, this variable will
    be kept during the Tcl 8.x period, but just defined as
    the empty string. Everywhere else, it will be gone
    for Tcl 8.7 and higher.
  * The same for _TK\_DBGX_ in Tk 8.7.

# Compatibility

Extensions using it will still work for Tcl 8.x, since _TCL\_DBGX_
is still defined in tclConfig.sh as empty string. It just
cannot be used to detect a debug Tcl build any more.

It also means that Windows debug builds using makefile.vc
against Tcl 8.7 and higher no longer have 'd' or 'g'
in their dll names any more.

# Implementation

See the [`death-to-dbgx`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?r=death-to-dbgx) branch.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
