# TIP 579: Improved auto_path for Safe Base interpreters
	Author:         Keith Nash <k.j.nash@usa.net>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        07-Jul-2020
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
	Keywords:       safe interp auto_path access_path
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-579-8-6 tip-579-8-7
------

# Abstract

This TIP proposes modifying the Safe Base to give users the option of defining the ::auto\_path in a Safe Base interpreter to conform to the specification given in *pkg_mkIndex\(n\)* and *library\(n\)*.  The default is to preserve the existing behavior of the Safe Base, in which the ::auto\_path includes a large number of additional directories.

# Rationale

A Safe Base interpreter is a safe slave interpreter that can apply the commands **load** and **source** to files in certain directories specified by its master interpreter.  The list of those directories is called the *access path* and is recorded in the master interpreter.  In the Safe Base slave, each directory of the *access path* is represented by a token of the form $p\(:34:\) which includes a literal dollar character and an integer.  A filename can be composed as, for example, \[**file join** {$p\(:34:\)} pkgIndex.tcl\].  The Safe Base interpreter uses modified **source** and **load** commands that convert a filename rooted at an *access path* token to a real filename.  The tclIndex autoloader, **package** command, and **tcl::tm** command in Safe Base interpreters are compatible with such tokenized filenames.

The *access path* comprises the directories of the requested ::auto\_path and all their children, and the directories of the module path \[**tcl::tm::list**\] and all their descendants.

In a Safe Base interpreter, the value of ::auto\_path is currently set to the tokenized *access path*, rather than to a tokenized form of the usual definition given by *pkg_mkIndex\(n\)* and *library\(n\)*.  This feature, not documented in *safe\(n\)*, allowed **package** to work correctly despite the absence of the **glob** command in a Safe Base interpreter.  The value of ::auto\_path is synchronized with the tokenized *access path* whenever the latter is changed by a **safe::\*** command in the master interpreter.

When **tcl::tm** facilities were added to Tcl, a restricted form of **glob** was added to Safe Base interpreters.  This new **glob** command allows **package** to operate correctly when ::auto\_path conforms to the specification in *pkg_mkIndex\(n\)* and *library\(n\)*.  However, the Safe Base still defines the ::auto\_path to be equal to the tokenized *access path*, and as a result it lists a large number of directories that are used by **tcl::tm**, and have nothing to do with the purpose of ::auto\_path - seeking pkgIndex.tcl or tclIndex files.  This feature is unhelpful when debugging, because the list of directories in the *access path* can be very long.


# Proposed Change

\(a\) A new exported command **safe::setAutoPathSync**

\(b\) A new option for Safe Base interpreters, -autoPath, defined under certain conditions explained below.

\(c\) Revised behavior for the commands that can alter the *access path*, i.e. **safe::interpCreate**, **safe::interpInit**, **safe::interpConfigure**, and **safe::interpAddToAccessPath**.

The new command is

**safe::setAutoPathSync ?newValue?**

When an argument is supplied, the command returns an error in two cases: \(a\) if the argument is not a boolean value; \(b\) if any Safe Base interpreters exist.

Otherwise, the command is an accessor for a new namespace variable safe::AutoPathSync.  Normal return supplies the value of this variable.  The value is initialized when the file tcl8.6/safe.tcl is sourced by the autoloader.

The value \[**safe::setAutoPathSync**\] controls the behavior of all Safe Base interpreters, and can be changed only when no Safe Base interpreters are defined.  Typically the value will be set as part of initialization.

When \[**safe::setAutoPathSync**\] is true, the behavior is the same as in current Tcl.  The Safe Base interpreter's ::auto\_path is defined as a tokenized form of the *access path*.  Operations that change the Safe Base interpreter's *access path* also change its value of ::auto\_path.

When \[**safe::setAutoPathSync**\] is false, ::auto\_path is defined to fulfil the requirements of *pkg_mkIndex\(n\)* and *library\(n\)* only.  It is not modified when the *access path* changes, except by operations that give the slave default paths derived from those of its master - in these cases the slave's ::auto\_path is set to a tokenized form of the master's ::auto\_path.

When \[**safe::setAutoPathSync**\] is false, each Safe Base interpreter is given a new option "-autoPath" which can be used with the commands **safe::interpCreate**, **safe::interpInit**, and **safe::interpConfigure** in the same way as other options.  The -autoPath option is undefined when \[**safe::setAutoPathSync**\] is true, permitting 100% compatibility with the existing Tcl Safe Base.

In order to implement this new definition of ::auto\_path in a Safe Base interpreter, some changes must be made to the behavior of existing Safe Base commands when \[**safe::setAutoPathSync**\] is false.  These changes are specified below.


# Specification and Examples

The commands that can alter the *access path* are **safe::interpCreate**, **safe::interpInit**, **safe::interpConfigure**, and **safe::interpAddToAccessPath**.  The effects of these commands on the *access path* and ::auto\_path are described below, including the changes that are proposed by this TIP.

In this section:

* The *Existing Case* is defined to mean Tcl either in its current form, or with this TIP implemented and with \[**safe::setAutoPathSync**\] true.
* The *Extra Case* is defined to mean Tcl with this TIP implemented and with \[**safe::setAutoPathSync**\] false.  The differences from the *Existing Case* are the changes proposed by this TIP.
* Code Examples are given for the *Extra Case*.

The effects of options -accessPath and -autoPath on the value of the slave's ::auto_path can be expressed in four rules, with a fifth rule for the command  **safe::interpAddToAccessPath**.

\(1\) Calling **safe::interpCreate**, **safe::interpInit**, or **safe::interpConfigure** with an option/value pair for -autoPath.

* *Existing Case*
  * The option -autoPath is undefined.  The command will raise an error.
* *Extra Case*
  * The presence of the "-autoPath value" arguments has no effect on the *access path*.
  * The command applies option -autoPath *after* it determines the value of *access path* from the other arguments.
  * The command will set the slave's ::auto\_path to a tokenized form of the specified value.

\(2\) Calling **safe::interpCreate** or **safe::interpInit** without the option -accessPath, or with -accessPath {}; or calling **safe::interpConfigure** with -accessPath {}.

* This remains the most convenient way to initialize a Safe Base interpreter.
* Each command sets the *access path* to the master interpreter's ::auto\_path and its children, and then appends the directories of \[**tcl::tm::list**\] and their descendants.
* Each command sets the slave's \[**tcl::tm::list**\] to a tokenized form of the master's \[**tcl::tm::list**\].
* *Existing Case*
  * Each command sets ::auto\_path to the tokenized *access path*.
* *Extra Case*
  * If the option -autoPath is specified, the slave's ::auto\_path is determined by rule \(1\).
  * If the option -autoPath is not specified, each command sets the slave's ::auto\_path to a tokenized form of the master's ::auto\_path.

Examples of calls to commands **safe::\*** that belong to this category are:

<pre>
        safe::interpCreate foo
        safe::interpCreate foo -accessPath {}
        safe::interpInit bar
        safe::interpInit bar -accessPath {}
        safe::interpConfigure foo -accessPath {}
</pre>

\(3\) Calling **safe::interpCreate**, **safe::interpInit**, or **safe::interpConfigure** with a non-empty value of -accessPath.

Each such command:

* Sets the *access path* to the requested value, then appends \[**tcl::tm::list**\] and its descendants.
* Sets the slave's \[**tcl::tm::list**\] to a tokenized form of the master's \[**tcl::tm::list**\].
* *Existing Case*
  * Sets the slave's ::auto\_path to the tokenized *access path*.
* *Extra Case*
  * If option -autoPath is also present, the slave's ::auto\_path is determined by rule \(1\).
  * If the option -autoPath is not specified, commands **safe::interpCreate** and **safe::interpInit** each set the slave's ::auto\_path to {}.
  * If the option -autoPath is not specified, command **safe::interpConfigure** leaves the slave's ::auto\_path unchanged.

e.g.

<pre>
        safe::interpCreate foo -accessPath {
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib/tcl8.6
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib/tcl8.6/http1.0
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib/tcl8.6/opt0.4
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib/tcl8.6/msgs
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib/tcl8.6/encoding
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib
        }

        # The slave's ::auto_path must be given a suitable value:

        safe::interpConfigure foo -autoPath {
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib/tcl8.6
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib
        }

        # The two commands can be combined:

        safe::interpCreate foo -accessPath {
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib/tcl8.6
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib/tcl8.6/http1.0
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib/tcl8.6/opt0.4
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib/tcl8.6/msgs
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib/tcl8.6/encoding
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib
        } -autoPath {
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib/tcl8.6
            /usr/local/TclHome/lib
        }
</pre>

\(4\) Other calls of command **safe::interpConfigure** with option/value pairs.

The only case not covered by rules \(1\) to \(3\) is call to **safe::interpConfigure** with neither option -accessPath nor -autoPath.  Such a call does not alter either the *access path* or the ::auto\_path.

\(5\) Calling **safe::interpAddToAccessPath**.

* The command appends a directory to the slave's existing *access path*.
* It does not change the slave's \[**tcl::tm::list**\].
* *Existing Case*
  * It sets ::auto\_path to the tokenized *access path*
* *Extra Case*
  * It does not change the slave's ::auto\_path.

e.g.

* The example code below can be appended to the example code
that defines the interpreter foo in rule \(3\) above.
* In the *Extra Case* only, the slave's auto_path must be
modified to allow the interpreter to use the Img package.

<pre>
        safe::interpAddToAccessPath foo /usr/local/TclHome/lib/extras/Img1.4.11

        lassign [safe::interpConfigure foo -autoPath] DUM slaveAutoPath
        lappend slaveAutoPath /usr/local/TclHome/lib/extras/Img1.4.11
        safe::interpConfigure foo -autoPath $slaveAutoPath
</pre>

* In the examples below, no change is needed to ::auto_path, either
because the existing value allows access to the new package
directories, or because the added directories (e.g. timezone data)
do not concern packages.

<pre>
        safe::interpAddToAccessPath foo /usr/local/TclHome/lib/sqlite3.30.1.2

        foreach dir {
            tzdata
            tzdata/Africa
            ...
            tzdata/US
        } {
            safe::interpAddToAccessPath foo /usr/local/TclHome/lib/tcl8.6/$path
        }
</pre>

**Summary of Specification**

* *Existing Case*
  * Safe Base commands set the slave's ::auto\_path to the tokenized *access path*.
  * Advantages: the caller need not be concerned with the slave's ::auto\_path.
  * Disadvantages: does not conform to *pkg_mkIndex\(n\)* and *library\(n\)*; the slave's ::auto\_path includes many directories that do not belong in the search path for pkgIndex.tcl or tclIndex files; the list of directories is very long and this is unhelpful when debugging.
* *Extra Case*
  * The commands in rule \(2\) set the slave's ::auto\_path to a tokenized form of the master interpreter's.
  * When other commands change the *access path*, the caller is responsible for making any necessary changes to the slave's ::auto\_path.  The new -autoPath option simplifies this task.

# Reference Implementation

Branches TIP-579-8-6 and TIP-579-8-7 in the public fossil repository for Tcl.

# Compatibility

The default value of \[**safe::setAutoPathSync**\] is 1.  The new interpreter option -autoPath is undefined in this case.  All existing code will behave in the same way as before.

If desired, the default value of \[**safe::setAutoPathSync**\] could be changed to 0 at a future major revision of Tcl.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
