# TIP 58: Extend [set] to Assign Multiple Values to Multiple Variables
	Author:         Anselm Lingnau <anselm@strathspey.org>
	State:          Rejected
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        02-Sep-2001
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a multiple assignment command as a
backwards-compatible extension to the Tcl _set_ command.

# Introduction

Often one needs to assign values to several variables in close
proximity.  Right now several _set_ commands are necessary:

	  set a 123
	  set b 456

or

	  set a 123; set b 456

Or one abuses the _foreach_ command:

	  foreach {a b} {123 456} break

However, by analogy to the _variable_ and _array set_ commands,
the following would be useful:

	  set a 123 b 456

This would assign 123 to the variable _a_ and 456 to the variable
_b_.

Note that this extension is backwards-compatible to existing uses of
the _set_ command since until now only one or two arguments to
_set_ were allowed.

# Specification

The _set_ command is extended to allow either one or an even number
of arguments.  The behaviour in the case of one argument remains the
one documented in the _set_ manual page; when an even number of
arguments is specified, the behaviour of _set v0 e0 ... vn en_ is
identical to that of the sequence of commands _set v0 e0; ...; set vn
en_ according to the traditional semantics, except that the way
Tcl processes commands means that _e0_ ... _en_ are all
evaluated before any assignments are performed. I.e., the commands

	  set a 1
	  set a 2 b $a
	  puts $b

print _1_, not _2_. If this is an issue you must use separate
_set_ statements.

The command _set v0 e0 ... vn en_ returns the value of _en_.

# Rationale

This extension is an obvious analogy to the _variable_ and _array
set_ commands of Tcl, both of which allow an alternating list of
names and expressions to be given as arguments.  It is completely
backwards-compatible \(_set_ invocations with more than two arguments
used to be syntax errors\) and very easily implemented.

This extension in no way prejudices against the adoption and use of
other multiple-assignment commands, such as _lassign_ \(see [[57]](57.md)\).
In particular, the _set_ extension is unsuitable for assigning a
list result to a number of variables element by element.  However, its
simplicity and consistency to other similar Tcl commands is appealing.

# Reference Implementation

A patch to Tcl 8.4a3 which implements the _set_ extension may be
found at <http://anselm.our-isp.org/set-patch.diff> - a patched Tcl
8.4a3 passes the Tcl 8.4a3 regression test suite with no test
failures.  No test cases nor documentation for the _set_ extensions
have been devised yet but this is easy to do once there is a consensus
that this feature is actually desirable.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain.

