# TIP 581: Master/Slave
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        17-July-2020
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
	Keywords:       Tcl
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-581
	Vote-Summary:   Accepted 9/0/0
	Votes-For:      BG, DKF, FV, JD, JN, KBK, KW, MC, SL
	Votes-Against:  none
	Votes-Present:  none
------

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to purge the usage of the Master/Slave paradigm from Tcl
and Tk. This is a gradual process to be completed in Tcl/Tk 8.7.

# Rationale

A discussion is currently going on about the Master/Slave and Blacklist/Whitelist
paradigm: Linux, Github and a lot more decided not to use this terms any
more. The TCT as a whole has no opinion on this (although individual member
will - sure - have an opinion). Since Tcl is a language for everyone, we
should not make life difficult for people being enforced to comply with
whatever rules. Since there is very little impact on Tcl, let's bend a little bit.

For Tk we cannot simply replace the Master/Slave paradigm to Parent/Child.
Sometimes it's better to replace `Master` to `Main` (e.g. when menu's
are involved). In the case of Tk's geometry handles (pack/place/grid),
we will use the container/content concept. For Images, `Model` is
a better name for `Master`.

See: [Terminology, Power, and Inclusive Language in Internet-Drafts and RFCs](https://tools.ietf.org/id/draft-knodel-terminology-03.html)

# Specification (Tcl part)

In tclDecls.h, the following `#define`'s are added:
<pre>
\#define Tcl\_CreateChild Tcl\_CreateSlave
\#define Tcl\_GetChild Tcl\_GetSlave
\#define Tcl\_GetParent Tcl\_GetMaster
</pre>
In tclIntDecls.h, the following `#define` is added:
<pre>
\#define TclSetChildCancelFlags TclSetSlaveCancelFlags
</pre>

Further on, the "interp" command will get an additional
subcommand "children", which is synonym for "slaves".

That's it! This will allow extension/application writers
to comply with external limitations when they want to or
are forced to do so.

The "interp slaves" subcommand will not be deprecated, not
even in Tcl 9.0. Neither will the usage of `Tcl_CreateSlave`
and friends be deprecated: Extension/application writers
are not forced to make the change, but they will be able
to.

In Tcl 8.7, the documentation and header files will be
changed to comply with this renaming. The above `#define`'s will
be reversed, so the functions will continue to be available under
the old name too.

# Specification (Tk part)

In tk.h, the following `#define` is added:
<pre>
\#define Tk\_ImageModel Tk\_ImageMaster
</pre>
In tkDecls.h, the following `#define` is added:
<pre>
\#define Tk\_GetImageModelData Tk\_GetImageMasterData
</pre>
In tkInt.h, the following `#define` is added:
<pre>
\#define TkGetContainer TkGetGeomMaster
</pre>
In tkIntPlatDecls.h, the following `#define` is added:
<pre>
\#define TkMacOSXGetContainer TkGetTransientMaster
</pre>

Further on, the "pack"/"place"/"grid" commands will get an additional
subcommand "content", which is synonym for "slaves".

The original "pack/place/grid slaves" subcommands will not be deprecated.

In Tcl 8.7, the documentation and header files will be
changed to comply with this renaming. The above `#define`'s will
be reversed, so the functions will continue to be available under
the old name too.

# Compatibility

This is 100% upwards compatible.

# Addendum

After the vote completed, a discussion started whether
`TkGetGeomContainer`/`TkGetTransientContainer` really were
good names describing the functions well. The outcome of
this was the decision to rename those finally to
`TkGetContainer`/`TkMacOSXGetContainer`, therefore the
text above was adapted accordingly. Since Tcl doesn't
guarantee keeping internal API the same in minor releases,
this might be changed further in Tcl 8.7, but in any future
Tcl 8.6 release it will not change any more.

<pre>
\#define TkGetGeomContainer TkGetGeomMaster
\#define TkGetTransientContainer TkGetTransientMaster
</pre>

# Implementation

See the [`tip-581 (Tcl)`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?r=tip-581) branch.
and the [`tip-581 (Tk)`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/timeline?r=tip-581) branch.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
