# TIP 582: Comments in Expressions
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        13-Aug-2020
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       Tcl
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-582
-----

# Abstract

This TIP adds a comment syntax to Tcl's expression language.

# Rationale

While not especially common, multiline expressions do occur in Tcl scripts.
They are particularly likely to occur when an expression is complicated, and
are often used for describing non-trivial conditions. These are situations
where being able to put in a comment, especially for later stages of the
expression, would be very useful. (The first line is usually best commented on
the line before.) But we have no syntax for doing so! It's possible to hack it
like this:

```
if {[info exists abc] && [info exists def] &&
    [# The variables exist, so we can now use them in the test
    foobar $abc $def] > 123
} then { ...
```

But that's really strange and contorted, especially when you don't have a
convenient command substitution to hide it inside. You might have to resort to
something like this:

```
if {[info exists abc] && [info exists def] &&
    "1[# The variables exist, so we can now use them in the test
    ]" && $abc($def) > 123
} then { ...
```

I think we can agree that that's suboptimal.

Note that expressions in real code often get quite a lot longer and more
complicated than these examples.

# Specification

There should be a comment format added to expressions. This will be done by
making the `#` character, currently uninterpreted by expressions, be a comment
introducing character whenever it is parsed at a point in the expression where
it would be legal to have whitespace.
It has the same lexical value as whitespace, never causing values to become
spliced together.
(Note that this does not include the content of command substitutions in
expressions; they were already covered by Tcl's command parsing rules, and as
such already had a comment format.)
The comment will last from that
character to the end of the line or the end of the expression, whichever comes
first. Note that because expressions are often enclosed in braces, comments
are very likely to have to obey usual brace balancing rules in practice: this
is not a feature of comments themselves but rather of Tcl's general parsing.

As a bonus, most existing editors and IDEs will probably highlight the new
syntax correctly without any change on their part.

## Example

The above will allow us to rewrite our first expression from earlier as this:

```
if {[info exists abc] && [info exists def] &&
    # The variables exist, so we can now use them in the test
    [foobar $abc $def] > 123
} then { ...
```

As you can see, we've got the bracket visually associated with the call of the
subcommand again. The second expression becomes even clearer:

```
if {[info exists abc] && [info exists def] &&
    # The variables exist, so we can now use them in the test
    $abc($def) > 123
} then { ...
```

# Implementation

See the [`tip-582`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?r=tip-582) branch
for Tcl.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
