# TIP 587: Default utf-8 for source command
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Vote-Summary:   Accepted 9/0/0
	Votes-For:      BG, DGP, DKF, FV, JN, KBK, KW, MC, SL
	Votes-Against:  none
	Votes-Present:  none
	Created:        20-Sept-2020
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       Tcl source
	Tcl-Version:    9.0
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-587
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to make the default encoding for the "source" command utf-8.

# Rationale

The "utf-8" encoding is the most universal encoding available, more and more
systems use it as system encoding. Introducing this change means that
Tcl-9 (or even 8.7) scripts can start using any Unicode character without needing to
use the escaped \\u???? or \\U?????? forms.

Starting with TIP #389 (Tcl 8.7), invalid bytes 0x80 up to 0x9F are interpreted
as the cp1252 characters € up to Ÿ. This means that any script which was
written in the "cp1252" encoding (most common on Windows) will get the
expected outcome using Tcl's "utf-8" decoder. Since "cp1252" is a superset
of "iso8859-1" (most common on older UNIX'es), the same holds for "iso8859-1".

Tcl's current "utf-8" decoder strips the first BOM (Byte Order Mark) from
the stream. This means that even scripts using the Windows BOM-prepended
"utf-8" files (not recommended, but still can be produced by Notepad)
will work fine.

If Tcl is not fully initialized (so just `Tcl_CreateInterp()`, not `Tcl_Main()`),
it doesn't get a chance to determine the system encoding from the environment.
On Windows, it falls back to "cp1252" in that case, on MacOS to "utf-8" and
on other systems to "iso8859-1". It's unlikely really being noticed, but this
TIP proposes to change that to "utf-8" in all cases. Since this is a
potential incompatibility for external applications embedding Tcl, this
change should be made for Tcl 9.0 only.

# Specification

 * The `source` command without `-encoding` will assume "utf-8" as default in
   stead of the system encoding.
 * Scripts started from the "tclsh" commandline without `-encoding` will
   read the file using Tcl's "utf-8" decoder.
 * The fallback encoding for embedded build information (TIP #59) will change
   from "cp1252" (windows)/"iso-8859-1"(UNIX) to "utf-8".
 * The `open` command and other channel functionalities are kept as
   they are now.
 * The fallback for the system encoding will change to "utf-8" on all platforms.
   Tcl 9.0 only.

 This TIP is basically for 9.0. But all changes can be made on 8.7
 with almost no risk, except for the last one. Therefore, there will be
 separate votes for bringing this to 9.0 and bringing it (except for
 the last point) to 8.7 too.

# Compatibility

For scripts using ASCII characters only (as was the only portable way
to write scripts in Tcl 8.x) this is fully upwards compatible. Scripts
assuming a different system encoding than "ascii", "utf-8", "cp1252"
or "iso-8859-1" will break. On MacOS and most modern UNIX-like systems
(which already have "utf-8" as system encoding) it's 100% compatible.

# Implementation

See the [`tip-587`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?r=tip-587) branch.
Tcl 8.7 part: [`tip-587-for-8.7`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?r=tip-587-for-8.7) branch.

A Tk modified demo showing how this eliminates the need to use Unicode
escape sequences is here: [`tip-587`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/timeline?r=tip-587) branch.
(This demo works with Tk 8.6 too, even without this TIP, since the "widget"
demo is adapted to source all other demos using `-encoding utf-8` explicitly)

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
