# TIP 588: Unicode for (X11) keysyms
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           In progress
	Created:        23-Oct-2020
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       X11
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tk-Branch:	keysym-unicode
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to allow Unicode characters in X11 keysyms.

# Rationale

In Tk 8.6, the list of supported keysyms is based on X11R5. In Tk 8.7,
this list is upgraded to X11R6. This makes the keysym table a lot larger. The
file "keysymdef.h" in Tk 8.6 has 1003 #define\'s, the same file in Tk 8.7
currently has 2109 #define\'s, that's more than doubled.

Many of those keysyms have an value which is just 0x1000000 more than the
Unicode symbol entry, e.g.:

<pre>
#define XK_Armenian_ligature_ew       0x1000587  /* U+0587 ARMENIAN SMALL LIGATURE ECH YIWN */
</pre>

# Specification

In all places where X11 keysyms are allowed, Tk will now allow the Unicode
character directly. Example:

<pre>
    bind .text &lt;colon> {puts colon}
    bind .text &lt;EuroSign> {puts pingping}
    bind .text &lt;Armenian_ligature_ew> {puts hello}
</pre>

can now be written directly as:

<pre>
    bind .text &lt;:> {puts colon}
    bind .text &lt;€> {puts pingping}
    bind .text &lt;և> {puts hello}
</pre>

All entries in the keysym table which are new in X11R6 and have a keysym
number which is 0x1000000 more than the Unicode symbol entry, are
removed from Tk's keysym table. They only can be accessed in the
"bind" command using the Unicode character directly. This reduces
the keysym table from 2109 back to only 1343 entries.

All entries in the keysym table which already existed in X11R5 but having
the same relation with the Unicode symbol entry, will be deprecated.

All entries in the ascii and latin range (between 0x21 and 0xFF) and which
are printable (so no "space" and "nobreakspace") and don't conflict with
the binding syntax (so no "greater" and "minus") and don't have other
special meaning in Tcl (so no "backslash" and "semicolon") will be
deprecated in its long form.

Further on, there are a number of synonymes in the binding specification,
which are only possibly confusing people: e.g. \<M\> is equivalent to \<Meta\>,
\<KeyPress\> is equivalent to \<Key\> and \<ButtonPress\> is equivalent to \<Button\>.
This TIP proposes to deprecate the \<M\>, \<KeyPress\> and \<ButtonPress\> forms.

If Tk is compiled with `-DTK_NO_DEPRECATED`, all forms declared deprecated will
be actually unavailable. This can be used to test your scripts, whether
they actually still use deprecated features. But this compile flag is
not recommended to be used in production.

# Compatibility

This is fully upwards compatible with Tk 8.6, but not with Tk 8.7a3.

# Reference Implementation

In tk branch keysym-unicode

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
