# TIP 589: Deprecate "-fg", "-bg", "-bd" options in Tk.
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        27-Oct-2020
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tk-Branch:	deprecate-bd-bg-fg
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to deprecate those 3 extremely short Tk options, and all
related ones.

# Rationale

This TIP is inspired by the "revised_text" branch (TIP #466), which has
this renaming as one of its features:

 * Tag options \(introduced in 8.6.6\) -overstrikefg and -underlinefg were
   renamed to **-overstrikecolor** and **-underlinecolor**

There are many options terminating in "fg", and the same holds for "bg"
and "bd" (synonym for "borderwidth").

# Specification

All options terminating in "fg" and "foreground" are renamed to be
ending in "color". So "-overstrikefg" becomes "-overstrikecolor"
and "-foreground" becomes "-color". The original options are now deprecated,
but still available as synonym, except if Tk is compiled with `-DTK_NO_DEPRECATED`.

All options terminating in "bg" are renamed to be
ending in "background". The original options are now deprecated,
but still available as synonym, except if Tk is compiled with `-DTK_NO_DEPRECATED`.

All options terminating in "bd" (already synonym for "borderwidth") are now deprecated,
but still available as synonym, except if Tk is compiled with `-DTK_NO_DEPRECATED`.

# Compatibility

This is fully upwards compatible with Tk 8.6 and 8.7a3.

# Reference Implementation

In tk branch deprecate-bd-bg-fg

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
