# TIP 590: Case-Sensitive Package Names
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        4-Nov-2020
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       package
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:	case-sensitive-pkg
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes to make the Tcl package mechanism fully
case-sensitive.

This TIP is - at first sight - the opposite of TIP #339, which
was rejected at that time. However the goal is the same: Make
it possible to start using lowercase package names while
still keeping maximum compatibility with Tcl 8.5/8.6.

Quote from TIP #339 which also applies to this TIP: "Most people
will likely simply start to write all package names lower-case after this change".

# Rationale

Let's run the "package names" command. Possible outcome:

<pre>
    % package names
    Thread http tcl::tommath TclOO tcl::idna opt tcltest zipfs cookiejar msgcat zlib Ttrace Tcl platform sqlite3 Tk
</pre>

From this, we cannot really see where those packages came from.
Some are distributed from within Tcl (tcl::tommath, zlib, TclOO, zipfs), some
are distributed as tm modules (http, msgcat, platform), some
are in the battery-included Tcl distribution (Thread, Ttrace, sqlite3).

Also, some strange current behavior:

<pre>
    % package require SQLITE3
    can't find package SQLITE3
    % load {} SQLITE3
    package "SQLITE3" isn't loaded statically
    % package require sqlite3
    3.32.3
    % load {} sqlite3
    % load {} SQLITE3
    % load {} sqlite
    package "sqlite" isn't loaded statically
</pre>

So the sqlite3 package is only available in lowercase form.
But as soon as it is loaded, it is recognized in uppercase
form as well. It looks like the package mechanism is almost
case-sensitive, but in a few places case-insensitive
compares are used when handling package names.

# Specification

* All remains of case-insensitive handling of package names
(mainly in tclLoad.c) are eliminated. The "package" mechanism
becomes fully case-sensitive, the strange behaviour as described
above can no longer be observed but is considered an error.

* Package names can be UPPERCASE, lowercase, CamelCase, all
different forms are considered separate packages which
can live happily side-by-side.

* In order to bring some consistency in package names, this
TIP proposes to rename some packages. The old package names
are kept as well.

    - TclOO   ⟶  tcl::oo
    - zipfs   ⟶  tcl::zipfs
    - zlib    ⟶  tcl::zlib
    - Tcl     ⟶  tcl
    - Tcltest ⟶  tcl::test
    - Tk      ⟶  tk
    - Tktest  ⟶  tk::test

This means that both "package require tcl" and "package require Tcl"
can be used interchangably. But "package require TCL" won't work.
The old names will be deprecated, but not removed, not even in Tcl 9.0.

* The rules for calculating the symbol for the "&lt;packagename>_Init"
proc in dynamically loaded libraries stay almost the same: Still the
first character of the package name is converted to uppercase,
all the other characters to lowercase. One change: If the package
name contains "::", the two colons will be removed from the symbol name.
This allows the (internal, for test purposes only) "Tcltest"
package to be renamed to "tcl::test", without conflicting
with the (global) "tcltest" package.

* From now on, the recommended way to name packages is lowercase.

* The "pkgName" argument of `Tcl_StaticPackage` doesn't need to
be camelcased any more.

# Compatibility

This is almost compatible with Tcl 8.5/8.6, except for the
current strange behaviour of the "load" command, which
will no longer work case-insensitive.

# Reference Implementation

In tcl branch case-sensitive-pkg

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
