# TIP 592: Stop support for Windows XP, Server 2003, Vista, Server 2008 
	Author:         Ashok P. Nadkarni <apnmbx-wits@yahoo.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           In progress
	Created:        12-Dec-2020
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-592
-----

# Abstract

TIP 487, which proposed dropping support for versions of Windows prior to
Windows XP, has already been accepted for Tcl 8.7. This TIP proposes
dropping the following additional Windows versions based on Microsoft
EOL'ing these years ago and negligible current market presence.

* Windows XP (V5.1)
* Windows Server 2003 (V5.1)
* Windows Vista (V6.0)
* Windows Server 2008 (V6.0) (not to be confused with Server 2008 R2 which
  shares the ABI with Windows 7 and will continue to be supported)

This TIP is intended to apply to both Tcl and Tk.

# Motivation

Three years have passed since TIP 487 was proposed and accepted. In that
time, market share of the Windows XP, Windows Server 2003 and Vista has
dropped to well below 1% each and likely to plunge further by the time 8.7
releases. Windows Server 2008 statistics are not easily available but has
also been EOL'ed and mostly supplanted by Server 2008 R2 which will continue
to be supported. Furthermore, those systems are legacy systems and very
unlikely to be upgraded to Tcl 8.7 even if they run Tcl at all.

Dropping support for older systems reduces the need for numerous API checks and
the testing burden. In addition, it will allow the use of
new APIs related to I/O, synchronization, threading etc. introduced in
Windows 7.

# Tool chain implications

Use of Windows 7 API also requires support from compiler tool chains.
In particular, with respect to Microsoft compilers, Tcl 8.7 will require
Visual Studio 2015 or later. The Mingw(-w64) gcc tool chain continues to be supported.

# Implementation

Use of newer API's will automatically prevent their loading into old Windows
versions. If desired, checks can also be added through the executable
manifest and/or explicit version checks in the code at runtime.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
