# TIP 593: Efficient List Item Test-and-Take
	Author:         Donal Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        31-Dec-2020
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       Tcl, lists
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a command that does part (handling lists) of the more
general programme proposed by [TIP #513](513.md).

# Rationale

[TIP #513](513.md) covers the general rationale for having fused operations
for testing for the presence of an item and removing that item as a single
operation. However, the concrete API proposed by that TIP is somewhat complex;
this TIP proposes a simplified version for the list case (other TIPs will have
to handle arrays and dictionaries).

# Specification

The `ltake` command should take three or more arguments:

 > **ltake**_listVarName_ _elemVarName_ _index_ ?_index_ ...?
 
The _listVarName_ argument should be the name of a variable containing a Tcl
list, the _elemVarName_ should be the name of a variable that may have an
element of the list transferred into it, and the _index_ argument (or
arguments) should indicate a particular location in the list to take the
element from. The result of the command is a boolean; true if the element
existed (and was transferred), false otherwise. The use of multiple _index_
arguments will be the same as in **lindex** and **lset**.

Note that if the index path leads into a non-list or off the end of a list,
the command does not error (those are cases that result in a false result),
but if either _listVarName_ or _elemVarName_ cannot be written to, the command
will error. (Conceptually, _listVarName_ will have the updated list written
back to it after the extracted element is written to _elemVarName_; using the
same variable name in both places is unlikely to be desired.)

Code that uses this command may expect that taking from the `end` index will
be implemented in linear time, effectively acting as a kind of "lpop".
Removing from other indices (especially including `0`) may be slower due to
the rearrangement of the list contents.

# Example

For example:

```
set x {a b c d e}
while {[ltake x y 2]} {
    puts "TAKEN: $y"
}
puts "LEFT: $x"
```

will print:

```
TAKEN: c
TAKEN: d
TAKEN: e
LEFT: a b
```

# Copyright

This document is placed in public domain.
