# TIP 594: modernize "file stat" interface
	Author:         Emiliano Gavilán <emilianogavilan@gmail.com>
	Author:         aspect <tcler@abstracted-spleen.org>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        13-Jan-2021
	Post-History:
	Keywords:       Tcl, file
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Ticket:     560c5e438c47f5fdd34846dbb333ab96cb905416
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes extending the `file stat` and `file lstat` commands to return
a dictionary if no `varName` argument is provided.

# Rationale

The result of `file stat` is traditionally stored in an array named by its
second argument.  Now that dicts are available, a more ergonomic alternative is
to simply return a value that the caller can process with the `dict` command,
pass to other procs or return as a result.  The original usage is preserved by
making the `varName` argument optional.


# Specification

The `file stat` and `file lstat` commands are both changed in exactly the same
way.  Using `file stat` as an example, its signature is changed from:

    file stat name varName

to:

    file stat name ?varName?

With two arguments, it behaves exactly like before.  With only one argument:

* errors are reported exactly as they would be if `varName` was provided
* if no error occurs, the result is returned as a dict instead of by populating
  an array

Previously, calling `file stat` with only one argument would raise a `{TCL
WRONGARGS}` error.

# Example

Old (and preserved) usage:

    % file stat / st
    % parray st
    st(atime)   = 1610459586
    st(blksize) = 4096
    st(blocks)  = 8
    st(ctime)   = 1605692955
    st(dev)     = 64769
    st(gid)     = 0
    st(ino)     = 2
    st(mode)    = 16749
    st(mtime)   = 1605692955
    st(nlink)   = 18
    st(size)    = 4096
    st(type)    = directory
    st(uid)     = 0

New usage:

    % file stat /
    type directory size 4096 mtime 1605692955 ino 2 dev 64769 atime 1610459586 uid 0 ctime 1605692955 nlink 18 gid 0 blksize 4096 mode 16749 blocks 8

# Implementation

The ticket [modernize "file stat" interface](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/tktview?name=560c5e438c47f5fdd34846dbb333ab96cb905416) includes a patch by Emiliano Galivan.  This patch includes an update to the manual, a new test `cmdAH-28.14` and changes two existing tests to accomodate the new interface (`cmdAH-28.1` and `cmdAH-28.2`).


# Copyright

This document is placed in public domain.
