# TIP 599: Extended build information
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           In progress
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     build-info
-----
# Abstract

This TIP proposes new commands "tcl::build-info"
(and "tk::build-info", and the same for any extension wanting to do this)

Example:
<pre>
$ tclsh8.7
% tcl::build-info
8.7a6+4a8309fafe073cae4fb210cfcd37e6accd8e31e7558aefab3d7f2ad6a27540c2.clang-1200.utf-16
% tcl::build-info utf-16
1
% tcl::build-info commit
4a8309fafe073cae4fb210cfcd37e6accd8e31e7558aefab3d7f2ad6a27540c2
% tcl::build-info compiler
clang-1200
% tcl::build-info version
8.7a6
% tcl::build-info patchlevel
8.7a6

$ tclsh9.0
% tcl::build-info
9.0a3+f896257cbcef7829503585ca26430bb097c8c33258a3785f7611bbc21c3ba080.gcc-1002

>tclsh87
% tcl::build-info
8.7a6+4a8309fafe073cae4fb210cfcd37e6accd8e31e7558aefab3d7f2ad6a27540c2.magicsplat.msvc-1916.utf-16

</pre>

The build-info information consists of the version string, adding a '+' sign and some
crucial build information, to be used in Fossil bug reports. This way we can determine quickly
whether a 'static' build was used, whether a specific patched version (e.g. 'fedora',
which has a slightly different directory layout) was used, just by asking the
result of "tcl::build-info".

Another goal for this TIP is to provide additional information to applications using
TIP #596: "Stubs support for Embedding Tcl in other applications". Such applications
can now query Tcl build options even before creating an interpreter.

# Specification

In Tcl 8.x, package versions consist of integers separated by dots or (as final one) 'a' or 'b'.
e.g.:

* "1.2.6"
* "2.0a2"

This TIP proposes the possibility to get additional build metadata, which MAY be denoted by
appending a plus sign and a series of dot separated identifiers immediately following the
version. Identifiers MUST comprise only ASCII alphanumerics and hyphens [0-9A-Za-z-].
Identifiers MUST NOT be empty. Build metadata MUST be ignored when determining version precedence.
Thus two versions that differ only in the build metadata, have the same precedence. Examples:

* "1.2.6+tag1.tag2.tag3"
* "2.0a2+tag1.tag2.tag3"

Note that this is exactly the same way as how ["Semanic Versioning"](https://semver.org/#spec-item-10) versions
can add optional build metadata, that's not a coincidence. There's no need for Tcl to invent
its own wheel.

The Tcl build process is adapted to retrieve the commit-id from Fossil or GIT such that
it even survives a "make dist". So, if the Tcl source code was checked out from Fossil
or GIT and built, then `tcl::build-info` will contain the correct commit-id. If -
then - a "make dist" is used to create a tar.gz file, building Tcl from this
distribution will still show the same commit in `tcl::build-info`. At this moment,
only Fossil and GIT are supported, support for more VCS'es could be added in the future.

In Tcl, we want to build an unique version string which tells us crucial information about
how Tcl (or Tk or ....) was built. Advantage: anyone submitting a bug report, we can ask
to type "tcl::build-info" and it will help being able to reproduce the bug.

* The first identifier is always the Fossil commit-id. If the package doesn't come from fossil
  but from GIT, it's "git-&lt;commit-id&gt;". This way we can always locate the exact commit which
  was used as base from the build, even when building from a tarball which originated from Fossil or GIT.
* All other identifiers are sorted alphabetical.
* There are 4 (optional) predefined tags for the compiler used:
   "clang-xxxx"
   "gcc-xxxx"
   "icc-xxxx"
   "msvc-xxxx"
  where "xxxx" is the version of the compiler (two digits for major and two digits for minor version).
  More compilers will be added in the future, as desired.
* Then there is the following list of (optional) identifiers. Presence of such identifier indicates
  that this is a non-standard build: the identifier string indicates what manner this
  build is non-standard (except for `utf-16`, which is standard in Tcl 8.x but not in Tcl 9.0).
  Other packages than Tcl can use a subset of these possible identifiers, but there is no obligation
  that all packages should implement all of them.

  | Identifier  | Meaning |
  |:-------:|:----------------:|
  | `compiledebug` | Configured with "--enable-symbols=all", cflag `TCL_COMPILE_DEBUG` |
  | `compilestats`  | Configured with "--enable-symbols=all", cflag `TCL_COMPILE_STATS` |
  | `cplusplus`  | Compiled with a C++ compiler |
  | `debug`  | Configured with "--enable-symbols"|
  | `ilp32`  | Compiled as 32-bit (integers, longs and pointers are all 32-bit) |
  | `memdebug`  | Configured with "--enable-symbols=mem", cflag `TCL_MEM_DEBUG` |
  | `nmake`  | Built with "nmake" in stead of "make"|
  | `no-deprecate`  | Deprecated features are removed, cflag `TCL_NO_DEPRECATED` |
  | `no-thread`  | Compiled without support for threads |
  | `no-optimize`  | Compiler optimization has been switched off |
  | `objective-c`  | Compiled with an objective-c compiler |
  | `objective-cplusplus`  | Compiled with an objective-c++ compiler |
  | `purify`  | Compiled with purify information |
  | `profile`  | Compiled with profile information |
  | `static`  | Compiled as static library |
  | `utf-16`  | Internal string format is 'utf-16', not 'unicode' |

  More of those can be added in the future.

* Anyone patching Tcl can add its own identifier, so it's clear that
  Tcl is modified. E.g.:

  | Identifier  | Meaning |
  |:-------:|:----------------:|
  | `activestate` | "Activestate" patches are applied |
  | `apple`   | "apple" patches are applied |
  | `androwish`| "androwish" patches are applied |
  | `bawt`    | "BAWT" patches are applied |
  | `bsd`     | "BSD" patches are applied |
  | `cygwin`  | "Cygwin" patches are applied |
  | `debian`  | "Debian" patches are applied |
  | `fedora`  | "Fedora" patches are applied |
  | `freebsd` | "FreeBSD" patches are applied |
  | `microsoft` | "Microsoft" patches are applied |
  | `magicsplat` | "Magicsplat" patches are applied |
  | `openbsd` | "OpenBSD" patches are applied |
  | `redhat`  | "Redhat" patches are applied |
  | `ubuntu`  | "Ubuntu" patches are applied |

  (just examples, you can invent your own). Binary distributions can patch Tcl
  adding their own identifier, even if it's only for 'branding'. There
  could be multiple ones (e.g. "ubuntu" could decide to use the "debian"
  patches as well)

* Calling `tcl::build-info <identifier>` will return `1` if the identifier is
  present in the build-info, `0` if not. But there are 4 pseudo-identifiers:

  | Identifier  | Meaning |
  |:-------:|:----------------:|
  | `commit`   | Returns the commit-id from Fossil (or GIT) |
  | `compiler` | Returns the identifier identifying the compiler used |
  | `patchlevel`| Returns the patchlevel |
  | `version`    | Returns the version |

* The functions `Tcl_FindExecutable`, `Tcl_InitSubsystems`, `Tcl_SetPanicProc` and
  `TclZipfs_AppHook` are modified to return the build-info string as described in this
  TIP. Those functions are meant to be used during Tcl initialization, which allows
  to double-check for presence or absence of certain identifiers as needed by the
  application (e.g. signaling "no-thread" when thread-support is missing).

* Deprecate the array elements tcl_platform[threaded] and tcl_platform[debug].
  In Tcl 9.0 those will be gone.

* Deprecate the following "tcl::pkgconfig" keys: `debug`, `threaded`, `profiled`,
  `64bit`, `optimized`, `mem_debug`, `compile_stats`. In Tcl 9.0 those will be gone.

# Discussion

It has been suggested to put additional keys in tcl::pkgconfig. But tcl::pkgconfig
does not only contain build information, it also contains installation configuration
information (like "bindir,runtime") which is not useful in a build-info string. Also
it would prevent the build-info string to be usable in `Tcl_InitSubsystems()` and
friends (TIP #596), before any Tcl interpreter is created.

An earlier implementation combined this approach with the "package" mechanism,
but this was rejected.

# Implementation

Implementation is in Tcl branch "build-info"

# Compatibility

This is 100% upwards compatible with Tcl 8.6.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
