# TIP 601: "encoding convertto/convertfrom" option to stop on error
	Author:         Harald Oehlmann <harald.oehlmann@elmicron.de>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     encodings-with-flags
-----
# Abstract

An additional option is proposed for `encoding convertto/convertfrom` to stop on the first encoding issue.
In addition, this change is proposed as default vaue for TCL9.x series.

# Rationale

The command `encoding convertfrom/convertto` currently does not raise any error on not convertable input.
Instead the following actions are observed:

   *   A replacement character `?` is used.
   *   An incomplete multi-byte sequence is added verbatim.

## Example 1: not encodable character

The Polish character "L with bar" is not contained in ISO-latin 1:

    % set s \u0141
    Ł
    % encoding convertto iso8859-1 $s
    ?

In the ISO-Latin 1 conversion, it is replaced by a question mark by the `encoding convertto` command.

## Example 2: Incomplete sequence returns remaining value verbatim

The following utf-8 sequence has an incomplete final sequence.
The second byte of the two byte sequence of the last character is missing.
The incomplete sequence is interpreted as ISO8859-1 and added to the string.

     % set s [encoding convertfrom utf-8 [string range [encoding convertto utf-8 ÄÖ] 0 end-1]]
     ÄÃ
     % scan $s %c%c
     196 195

The first character value 196 is the correct "Ä" character.
The second character is the verbatim byte of the incomplete utf-8 sequence:

     % scan [encoding convertto utf-8 Ö] %c%c
     195 150

## Use case 1: decode continuous multi-byte data


My personal use-case is a stream of UTF-8 data which is received by a USB character driver and the binary data is cut in 64 byte chunks.
The stream is continuous and I want to decode the received data.
If a UTF-8 byte is received partly, a false byte is created and the next chunk decoding does not work, as it starts with a part of a UTF-8 multibyte sequence.

It would be great to know, where the error is to stop the sequence.

Here is a code snipped with the current implementation:

    % catch {encoding convertfrom -stoponerror utf-8 [string range [encoding convertto utf-8 ÄÖ] 0 end-1]} e d
    1
    % set d
        -code 1\
        -level 0
        -errorstack {INNER {invokeStk1 ::tcl::encoding::convertfrom -stoponerror utf-8 Ã\x84Ã }}
        -errorcode {TCL ENCODING STOPONERROR 2}
        -errorinfo {unexpected byte sequence starting at index 2: '\xC3'
            while executing
            "encoding convertfrom -stoponerror utf-8 [string range [encoding convertto utf-8 ÄÖ] 0 end-1]"} -errorline 1

Note: "\\0x84" was replaced for the control character "IND" for visibility in the stack trace

Note: "C3" is the hexadecimal representation for decimal 195.
Thus, "\\xC3" is the first byte of the utf-8 representation of "Ö".

With this info, the `-errorcode` may be catched by a `try` clause and the error byte location (2) may be catched (see discussion section for an example).
The data before may by passed again to `encoding convertfrom` which is the correct received data.

Note: it would be efficient, if the already converted string may be returned also.
Then, the data must not be passed again to `encoding convertfrom`.
The current implementation does not fullfill this optimisation.

## Use case 2:

This use case is given in the following TCL ticket:
[Ticket 535705](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/info/535705ffffffffff) :

Wrong characters are included in a data base by character replacement when a character not in the current system encoding.
This causes issues in a multi-platform applications, as the error is not detected.

# Specification

## New Option
The `encoding` ensemble will be extended by two new options `-nothrow` and `-stoponerror`:

    encoding convertfrom ?-nothrow|-stoponerror? ?encoding? data
    encoding convertto ?-nothrow|-stoponerror|? ?encoding? data

The specified options have the following functionality:

| Options   | Description |
|:-------:|:----------------:|
| `-nothrow` | Any conversion data error is handled by replacement (by **?** or **U+FFFD**) of the concerned byte |
| `-stoponerror`  | The conversion stops with an error on any conversion data error |

The default value is `-nothrow` for TCL 8.x and `-stoponerror` for TCL 9.x.

## Error reporting

If `-stoponerror` is active, the following error reporting takes place in case of an conversion error.

### Definition of "error position"
The position of the error in the source string is indicated in the error reporting.
In case of multi-byte source data, this position is always one byte after the last correct multi-byte sequence.

###Error Message

The error message is: "unexpected byte sequence starting at index *error position*: '*byte value*'", for `encoding convertfrom`
or "unexpected character at index *error position*: '*character value*'", for `encoding convertto`
where *error position* is a number containing the source string error position as defined above.

*byte value*/*character value* is the hexadecimal representation of the byte in the source string where *error position* points to.

### Error Code

The error code is composed of the following 4 list elements:

1.  Fix word: `TCL`
2.  Fix word: `ENCODING`
3.  Fix word: `STOPONERROR`
4.  Value *error position*: The index in the source string (usually a byte array, in case of `encoding convertfrom`) of the error position.

## New C API

Introduce 2 new functions:

* `size_t Tcl_ExternalToUtfDStringEx(Tcl_Encoding encoding, const char *src, int srcLen, int flags, Tcl_DString *dsPtr)`
* `size_t Tcl_UtfToExternalDStringEx(Tcl_Encoding encoding, const char *src, int srcLen, int flags, Tcl_DString *dsPtr)`

These functions behave the same as `Tcl_ExternalToUtfDString/Tcl_UtfToExternalDString`, only they have
an additional `flags` parameter accepting the following additional values (can be used in combination):

* TCL_ENCODING_STOPONERROR: don't replace invalid characters/bytes but return the first error position. Default in Tcl 9.0.
* TCL_ENCODING_NO_THROW: replace invalid characters/bytes by a default fallback character. Always return -1. Default in Tcl 8.7.
* TCL_ENCODING_MODIFIED: convert NULL bytes to \\xC0\\x80 in stead of 0x00. Only valid for "utf-8" and "cesu-8". This flag may be used together with the other flags.

The TCL_ENCODING_MODIFIED flag can be used in extensions for generating "modified" encodings, such as java
(which uses "modified" cesu-8 internally). This flag is not exposed at script level, unlike `-stoponerror`/`-nothrow`.

The return value of these two functions is the error-position in case of an error reporting, or `(size_t)-1` if everything is OK.

# Discussion

## Ticket 535705

This TIP started in the [TCL ticket 535705](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/info/535705ffffffffff).
Please refer to this ticket for information about the initial discussion.

## Option design

The requirement to have two ortogonal flags is due to the fact, that it was proposed to change the default value from `-nothrow` to `-stoponerror` with **TCL9**.
Otherwise, it is not possible to write code for **TCL8** and **TCL9**.
The ortogonal option `-nothrow`is not required if this default change is not seen as a possibility (it may be a vote option).

## Error reporting design

The list of categories for the error code return is given in the [tclvars manual page](http://www.tcl-lang.org/man/tcl8.7/TclCmd/tclvars.htm#M12).
The **TCL** category matches best.

This design allows to catch this error and get the error position by the following `try` pattern:

    try {
        set res [encoding convertto -stoponerror iso8859-1 $input]
    } trap {TCL ENCODING STOPONERROR} {errorMessage errorDict} {
        set errorIndex [lindex [dict get $errorDict -errorcode] 3]
        ...
    }

# Rejected alternatives

## Report the error character

The original implementation reported the failing character/byte in the error message.
This may be a control character corrupting a terminal view.
IMHO error messages should be in the printable ASCII character set.
Therefore this was removed, the character/byte is now only reported in hexadecimal notation.

## --stoponerror as boolean option

An alternative would be to use `-stoponerror 1` in stead of `-stoponerror` and `-stoponerror 0` in stead of `-nothrow`.
This only makes the command longer, without much benefit.

## EILSEQ POSIX error code

Recent changes to TCL use the POSIX error **EILSEQ**: "invalid byte sequence", which looks like the most appropriate error message.
Nevertheless, the POSIX message does not allow to return the error position.


# Alternate solutions

See [[607]](607.md), which is not actually an alternative, but can be added later on top of this TIP.

# Implementation

Implementation is in Tcl branch `encodings-with-flags`

# Compatibility

The implementation is fully backward compatible for 8.7.
There is a compatibility break for TCL 9.0.

# Credits

Thanks to Jan Nijtmans for idea and implementation.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
