# TIP 608: Add virtual event when font configuration changes
	Author:         Brian Griffin <briang42@easystreet.net>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Created:        07-Aug-2021
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tk,font,WorldChanged,event
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
	Tk-Ticket:      3049518
-----

# Abstract

This tip proposes adding a virtual event that provides script level
access to the WorldChanged callback as defined in the
[Tk_SetClassProcs](https://www.tcl.tk/man/tcl8.6/TkLib/SetClassProcs.html) C API.
This callback, and the proposed virtual
event, are used to notify widgets when a font is changed and that the
layout of the widget needs to be recalculated.  Currently, there is no
script level notification of this event, the only access is via the
WorldChanged C level callback.  See [Tk-Ticket 3049518](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/tktview/3049518fffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff)

# Rationale

Tk and Ttk widgets currently handle font changes via the WorldChanged
callback that each internal widget initiates as part of the widget
construction.  There is no notification, via callback or event,
available at the script level.  This is important for any mega-widget,
or application that implements any sort of layout algorithm at the
script level.  This is also true for items on a Canvas that
include text.  If there is any sizing relationship between these items
and other Canvas items, the layout can become incorrect when the font changes
its size or shape.

# Specification

A new virtual event is defined, **`<<TkWorldChanged>>`**.  This event will
be sent to every widget after the C level callback has been made.  The
user_data field for this event will have value "**FontChanged**" in order
to distinquish this "WorldChange" from any other form of
"WorldChanged" that may be implemented in the future, for example, screen
dimension change or screen resolution change.

# Reference Implementation

See the tk fossil branch
[bug-3049518](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/timeline?r=bug-3049518&m&c=1e04d669539944b0)
This implementation has been tested with modifications to the BWidgets
NoteBook widget and the Tablelist widget, solving layout issues these
mega-widgets currently have whenever a font is (re)configured.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain.

