# TIP 61: Make TK_NO_SECURITY Run-Time Switchable
	Author:         Jeff Hobbs <JeffH@ActiveState.com>
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <fellowsd@cs.man.ac.uk>
	State:          Deferred
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        12-Sep-2001
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.5
-----

# Abstract

This TIP changes the compile time Tk define TK\_NO\_SECURITY to be
switchable at run-time.

# Rationale

The TK\_NO\_SECURITY compile time \#define is available to disable some
security checking when send is used.  The direct comments in the
Makefile are:

	 # To turn off the security checks that disallow incoming sends when
	 # the X server appears to be insecure, reverse the comments on the
	 # following lines:
	 SECURITY_FLAGS		=
	 #SECURITY_FLAGS		= -DTK_NO_SECURITY

I propose to make this switch configurable at runtime through a _tk
securesend_ option.

# Benefits

Users would be able to debug between Tk applications on Unix using
_send_ without having to compile a special version of Tk or
manipulating the security settings of their X server to Tk's liking
\(which can then conflict with other work\).  It is common for users in
internal \("safe"\) networks to open up access to an X server with
_xhost \+machine_.

# Drawbacks

By allowing security to be disabled, users do possibly open up their
system to attack.  However, secure is the default setting, and any
paranoid users can _rename send \{\}_ to ensure that it is not used at
all.

# Reference Implementation

A full patch for this feature is available at:

<http://sf.net/tracker/?func=detail&aid=456732&group\_id=12997&atid=312997>

The proposal adds one element to the private _TkDisplay_ structure
\(configuration for secure send is done per display\), and creates the
Tcl level command:

		tk securesend ?-displayof window? ?boolean?

It leaves the TK\_NO\_SECURITY flag alone.  If specified, send is
insecure by default, otherwise it is secure.

# Comments

_DKF_ - It should be possible to control the setting of the
compile-time TK\_NO\_SECURITY flag from the _configure_ script; having
to edit the Makefile by hand to adjust it makes it too easy to
inadvertently break something by introducing an unfortunate typo. Being
able to pass a _--disable-security_ flag would make thing much easier
from a user's point of view, and will make it less likely that the Tk
maintainers will have to deal with bug reports that ultimately stem from
a dumb mistake made in a sensitive spot...

# Copyright  

This document has been placed in the public domain.

