# TIP 611: Add subcommands to the "photo image" command to rotate and reflect an image
	Author:         Arjen Markus <arjen.markus@users.sourceforge.net>, Richard Suchenwirth <suchenwi@googlemail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        2-Sep-2021
	Post-History:
	Tcl-Version:    8.6
	Implementation-URL: https://wiki.tcl-lang.org/page/rphoto
-----

# Abstract

The purpose of this TIP is to enable scripts to rotate a photo image
over +90 or -90 degrees or reflect it in the horizontal or vertical axis.
The image is rotated or reflected in-place.

# Rationale

Various commands, such as subsampling, are already available to
manipulate image data. A simple manipulation that is missing from the
current set of manipulations is rotation over 90 degrees in clockwise
or counter-clockwise direction. Code to so has been available on the
Wiki since 2010.

Reflection is possible by using negative increments for subsampling an
image. This is part of the copy subcommand and creates a new image.

While it would be possible to implement rotation as an option of the
copy subcommand, this presents a delicate problem: how would this
interact with the other options? Should these options be handled in the
order in which they are specified or should there be some hierarchy?

To avoid ambiguities and effects that are difficult to explain, this
TIP proposes to introduce separate subcommands for the two
isometric transformations.

# Proposal

This TIP implements two new subcommands for photo images, _rotate_ and
_reflect_, that have the effect of rotating the image by 90 degrees in a
clockwise or counter-clockwise direction or reflect it in the central
horizontal or vertical axis.

The subcommands are limited to photo images, as that is the most likely
format for which such a facility is useful.

The syntax is:

    $img rotate -90/90

where -90 means a clockwise rotation and 90 a counter-clockwise rotation.
(Note: the angle should for the moment be a multiple of 90 degrees.)

For reflection the syntax is:

    $img reflect h(orizontal)/v(ertical)

where "h" (or any abbreviation of "horizontal") means reflection in the
central horizontal axis and "v" (or any abbrebation of "vertical") means
refletion in the central vertical axis.

A reference implementation for rotating an image in place exists as
a standalone extension -- https://wiki.tcl-lang.org/page/rphoto.

Moreover, Christian Werner has proposed an implementation for this TIP for both rotation and reflection, see <https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/tktview/2058b607301bca07ed3bea2114579a01a42a6756>

The patch accepts angles other than multiples of 90 degrees and then
determines the closest multiple. An alternative could be to issue an
error message.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

