# TIP 613: New INDEX\_NULL\_OK flag for Tcl_GetIndexFromObj*()
	Author:         Jan Nijtmans <jan.nijtmans@gmail.com>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        09-Dec-2021
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       Tcl Tcl_GetIndexFromObj() Tcl_GetIndexFromObjStruct()
	Tcl-Version:    8.7
	Tcl-Branch:     tip-613
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a new `INDEX\_NULL\_OK` flag for `Tcl\_GetIndexFromObj*()` as `TCL\_INDEX\_NULL\_OK`.

It also proposes to implement the `TCL\_OPTION\_NULL\_OK` flag in Tk for the
options `TK\_OPTION\_BOOLEAN`, `TK_OPTION_JUSTIFY` and `TK_OPTION_ANCHOR`, in
the same way as already present for `TK\_OPTION\_RELIEF`.

# Rationale

In <b>Tk</b>, serveral options allow the empty string, but since `Tcl\_GetIndexFromObjStruct()` cannot handle
the empty string as input well, this results in special code in Tk to handle that. This is
not always done correctly, e.g.:
<pre>
$ wish8.6
% text .t
.t
% .t tag configure dummy -relief {}
% .t tag configure dummy -relief xxx
bad relief "xxx": must be flat, groove, raised, ridge, solid, or sunken
% .t tag configure dummy -wrap {}
% .t tag configure dummy -wrap foo
bad wrap "foo": must be char, none, word, or 
% 
</pre>
So, the error-message doesn't even mention that "" is a valid value, or it forgets
to quote the empty value.

The cause of the problem is [here](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/file?udc=1&ln=27&ci=73d9515d7f13f6fa&name=generic%2FtkTextTag.c):
the empty string is made part of a string array used by `Tcl\_GetIndexFromObj*()`.

The meaning of `TCL\_INDEX\_NULL\_OK` is that <b>Tcl\_GetIndexFromObj*()</b> no longer
gives an error when objPtr is supplied a NULL or "" argument, but it will return TCL_OK
and provide the index "-1". This functionality can then be used by Tk:
<pre>
$ wish8.7
% text .t
.t
% .t tag configure dummy -wrap {}
% .t tag configure dummy -wrap foo
bad wrap "foo": must be char, none, word, or ""
% 
</pre>

For Tk, the enum's `Tk\_Anchor` and `Tk\_Justify` will get new members
`TK\_ANCHOR\_NULL` resp. `TK\_JUSTIFY\_NULL` with value -1, equivalent with
the already existing `TK\_RELIEF\_NULL` (which is not an enum for historical reasons).
Without the `TCL\_OPTION\_NULL\_OK` flag in the `TK_OPTION_JUSTIFY` and `TK_OPTION_ANCHOR`
config information, everything functions as before, but when using the
`TCL\_INDEX\_NULL\_OK` the new enum values become valid values for those configuration options.

For `TK\_OPTION\_BOOLEAN`, the new possible value, when using the `TCL\_OPTION\_NULL\_OK`
flag, is -1.

# Caveat

Some extensions might have set the `TCL\_OPTION\_NULL\_OK` flag already, even
though it never worked. This might result in "" as possible option value, which was
previously impossible, and what might lead to new unexpected behavior. An example
of that is [this](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/tktview?name=6178610b1b)
bug (to be fixed soon) in Themed Tk. Solution: the extension should
no longer use the `TCL\_OPTION\_NULL\_OK` flag, or expect Tcl 8.7 as a minimum
and take care that the value -1 is handled properly.

# Implementation

Available in the [`tip-613`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tcl/timeline?r=tip-613) branch.

There's a [`tip-613`](https://core.tcl-lang.org/tk/timeline?r=tip-613) branch in Tk as
well, implementing the `TCL\_OPTION\_NULL\_OK` flag for `TK\_OPTION\_BOOLEAN`,
`TK_OPTION_JUSTIFY` and `TK_OPTION_ANCHOR`, using the `TCL\_INDEX\_NULL\_OK` flag.

This branch targets 8.7.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
