# TIP 66: Stand-alone and Embedded Tcl/Tk Applications
	Author:         Arjen Markus <arjen.markus@wldelft.nl>
	State:          Draft
	Type:           Informative
	Vote:           Pending
	Created:        02-Oct-2001
	Post-History:   
	Keywords:       installation,initialisation,embedded,resources
-----

# Abstract

This TIP describes the development and deployment of Tcl/Tk
applications, with particular attention on how to _embed_ the
interpreter into executables written in C or C\+\+.

# Introduction and Background

Usually, an application that uses Tcl/Tk in some way uses an
independent installation and the application itself is started via a
standard shell, like _tclsh_ or _wish_.  There are numerous
occasions when such a set-up is not convenient:

 * Installation of external software is not allowed unless the IT
   department at the client's site consents - a very reasonable
   approach to the uncountable problems that occur due to conflicting
   software in modern computing environments.

 * Distribution of a stand-alone program is much easier - less
   cluttering of disk space, all the files are in one directory tree,
   programs can easily be demonstrated or uninstalled.

 * If the scripting part solves a small problem in a larger
   environment that does not require Tcl/Tk, the extra megabytes and
   the separate installation seem an overkill.

Another reason to document the resources used by Tcl/Tk is that this
provides better insight in how to tune Tcl/Tk for a particular
application.

----

Two examples may illustrate the need for such stand-alone applications
and what is involved:

 1. When we were building an installation script for an MS Windows
    application using one of the commercial tools that are available
    for this arcane job, we ran into a bizarre limitation: text
    replacement was possible for the so-called Windows INI-files only,
    but not for other types of files.  The text to be replaced was the
    name of the installation directory.  After several trials with the
    programming constructs the tool allowed, we chose a much better
    solution: a small Tcl script wrapped into a stand-alone program
    using Freewrap.  \(The application itself now actually uses another
    stand-alone Tcl script to take care of the file management that
    was too complicated for ordinary DOS batch files.\)

 2. The second example involves a small program that proves the
    usefulness of Tcl/Tk in on-line visualisation.  The idea there is
    that large computational programs can send their data at regular
    steps during the computation to a separate program that plots
    these results in some meaningful way.  To achieve this the program
    exports the results to the Tcl interpreter which uses the socket
    command to send them to a \(primitive\) viewer.  For demonstration
    purposes you must be able to copy the program along with some
    files it needs on an arbitrary computer and, later, remove it with
    just a little effort.

Applications that use Tcl/Tk as an embedded library to achieve their
goals, rather than exist as extensions or applications written in Tcl,
can be quite useful.  Examples include on-line visualisation in large
computational programs, network applications that can be deployed as a
single file etc.  There is, however, little documentation on how to
build such applications and what is required for their installation.

----

The aim of this TIP is to provide guidelines that make this
development easier:

 * How to create an interpreter and test it within the larger
   environment?

 * What you can and can not do with a bare interpreter?

 * How to enhance its capabilities, such that it works as in an
   ordinary Tcl shell?

 * What \(binary and script\) libraries are required?

 * How to deal with other programming languages than C/C\+\+?

 * How to create applications that can be installed without an
   independent Tcl installation?

# Related TIPs and Discussions

The are several TIPs at the moment of this writing that are in some way
related to the subject:

 * [[4]](4.md) proposes to outline the release and distribution philosophy, so
   that it becomes easy to include generally useful extensions - the
   so-called "batteries included".

 * [[12]](12.md) focuses completely on the "batteries included" aspect of the
   source distribution.

 * [[34]](34.md) is intended to solve some of the more awkward issues of TEA,
   as the current build system actually requires separate versions for
   UNIX and Windows.

 * [[55]](55.md) defines the set-up of packages that can be automatically
   installed into an existing installation.

 * Postings on the news:comp.lang.tcl newsgroup frequently involve how
   to embed Tcl into a C application, with an emphasis on loading
   packages and the use of the _Tcl\_Init\(\)_ function.

 * Recently discussions have been held about supporting programming
   languages other than C.  Notably: Pascal, FORTRAN, Visual Basic.

# Contents of the Planned Document

The document that should help programmers with the issues discussed here
will have the following \(tentative\) table of contents:

 * Introduction, outlining its purpose.

 * Tcl's bootstrap procedure, describing how the usual shells work.

 * Creating interpreters, what a bare interpreter can and can not do,
   how to enrich it via start-up scripts like _init.tcl_.

 * Compiling and linking, the usual issues surrounding the making of a
   binary executable.

 * Interfacing to other programming languages, though possibly a huge
   subject, it will present some guidelines, both practical
   implementation and design issues.

 * Installation and deployment, should inform about the external
   resources \(environment variables, libraries, etc\) for the
   application.

 * Overview, provide a checklist of the various possibilities and how
   to achieve them, with pointers for further information.

 * Literature, all the good books and other references.

----

# Discussion

Issues that arise are:

 * what is the simplest way to embed Tcl,

 * what resources are needed \(in terms of script and binary libraries\)
   by such an application,

 * how can the application find everything it needs?

This TIP is meant to be a document that enables programmers who do not
have intimate knowledge of the Tcl core to build such application and
deploy them in the way they want.

Should it turn out that some automated tool would be nice to help the
programmers, then this TIP will also cover such a tool.

----

# Using the Tcl library

There are numerous ways an application written mainly in a language like
C can use the Tcl and Tk libraries \(in short: Tcl\):

   * The application can simply use Tcl as a convenient library of
     C routines. In that case, Tcl would provide such facilities as
     regular expressions or channels.

   * The application can use Tcl as a scripting tool, that is, it
     will call Tcl to evaluate scripts and import the results.

   * The application can use Tcl in a more complicated mixture:
     Tcl scripts get evaluated that require binary extensions
     \(both defined outside the application and as an integral
     part of the application\).

   * An application that uses Tcl need not be written in C, but
     could be written in any programming language that allows
     calls to and from C routines directly or indirectly.

_Note:_ due to the fact that the author is mostly familiar with the
UNIX/LINUX and Windows platforms, no comments will be made about the
Macintosh. This is completely due to ignorance, not to arrogance.

In principle, using the Tcl/Tk libraries is very simple: just create
a Tcl interpreter, fill it with variables, commands and so on and
feed it scripts, either as a file or as a string. It gets
more complicated in the following situations:

   * The interpreter must be able to handle packages and interact
     with the environment in much the same way as tclsh or wish.

   * The application needs to intermix its own processing with Tcl
     event loops \(such as continuing a calculation while a Tk window
     shows the progress\).

   * It must be possible to use the application independently from
     a full Tcl installation.

The key to a successful implementation is: understanding how to
properly initialise Tcl.

The application with which we will illustrate the various options
is a simple program without any virtues of its own. It will read
some data from a file, perform an insanely complicated but further
unspecified computation on these data and output them into some
convenient format to file.

The application will have two versions, a simple one consisting of
the three separate steps and a more complicated one consisting of
a preliminary step and then a loop involving both the computation
and the output.

Let us assume that the application is written in some convenient
programming language like C. The reasons for using Tcl are:

   * Flexible input routines

	   > By using the scripting capabilities of Tcl one can easily
     adapt the program to the input file or files that it should
     read.

   * Flexible output routines

	   > Again, the scripting capabilities allow adapting the output
     to the customer's wishes, without having to recompile and
     link it. This can be done for simple files on disk, but
     also graphical output or storage in a database is possible,
     _without changing the program itself_.

# The simplest way: create a bare interpreter

With the Tcl routine Tcl\_CreateInterp\(\) you can create an interpreter
that is capable of all the basic commands:

	  Tcl_Interp * interp         ;
	  char       * input_filename ;
	  char       * buffer         ;
	  double       x, y, z        ;
	
	  /* Create the interp, use it to read the given input file,
	     Note:
	     Using the string API for simplicity, no error checking
	  */
	  interp = Tcl_CreateInterp() ;
	  Tcl_SetVar( interp, "input_file", input_filename, TCL_GLOBAL_ONLY ) ;
	  Tcl_EvalFile( interp, startup_script ) ;
	
	  /* Extract the input data
	  */
	  buffer = Tcl_GetVar( interp, "x", TCL_GLOBAL_ONLY ) ;
	  Tcl_GetDouble( interp, buffer, &x ) ;
	  buffer = Tcl_GetVar( interp, "y", TCL_GLOBAL_ONLY ) ;
	  Tcl_GetDouble( interp, buffer, &y ) ;
	  buffer = Tcl_GetVar( interp, "z", TCL_GLOBAL_ONLY ) ;
	  Tcl_GetDouble( interp, buffer, &z ) ;
	
	  /* Destroy the interp - if you do not need it any longer
	  */
	  Tcl_DestroyInterp( interp ) ;

The output routine contains a similar fragment \(note, we assume
the Tcl interpreter was stored somewhere\):

	  Tcl_Interp * interp                   ;
	  char       * output_filename          ;
	  char         buffer[TCL_DOUBLE_SPACE] ;
	  double       a, b                     ;
	
	  /* Export the results to the interpreter
	  */
	  Tcl_PrintDouble( interp, a, buffer ) ;
	  Tcl_SetVar( interp, "a", buffer, TCL_GLOBAL_ONLY ) ;
	  Tcl_PrintDouble( interp, b, buffer ) ;
	  Tcl_SetVar( interp, "b", buffer, TCL_GLOBAL_ONLY ) ;
	
	  Tcl_SetVar( interp, "output_file", input_filename, TCL_GLOBAL_ONLY ) ;
	  Tcl_EvalFile( interp, report_script ) ;
	

To add error checking \(always do!\), use code like this:

	
	  Tcl_Channel errChannel ;
	
	  if ( Tcl_EvalFile( ... ) != TCL_OK ) {
	     errChannel = Tcl_GetStdChannel( TCL_STDERR ) ;
	     if ( errChannel != NULL ) {
	        TclWriteObj( errChannel, Tcl_GetObjResult(interp) ) ;
	        TclWriteChars( errChannel, "\n", -1 ) ;
	        ... /* Quit the program or other error handling? */
	     }
	  }
	

With this approach you need only to worry about the Tcl binary
libraries: if the dynamic versions are linked to your application,
then distribution of your application should include these binaries.
If, on the other hand the static versions are used, your application
already contains all of Tcl it needs all by itself.

The limitations of this approach are:

   * The utilities ordinarily defined via the Tcl initialisation
     script _init.tcl_ are not available. \(Note that these
     include such procedures as _tclPkgSetup_ and _unknown_\)

   * The Tcl variables _argc_, _argv_ and _argv0_ are not set.
     This may be problematic if you want to use these variables to
     communicate with the user, e.g. provide an initial script file
     on the command-line.

   * Character encodings are not available. This will limit your
     application to ASCII characters.

# Complete initialisation: the role of init.tcl

The next section outlines the full initialisation procedure that is used
in the standard _tclsh_ shell. This section concentrates instead on
some practical observations:

   * The routine Tcl\_FindExecutable\(\) does a lot more than its name
     suggests: it is responsible for initialising the various subsystems
     in a controlled way, it will find all the character encodings.

	   > It has to be called very early, before creating an interpreter.
     The results are stored in private variables that are used for
     all threads.

	   > If it can not find the executable, no harm is done: it will
     have initialised the subsystems anyway.

   * The routine Tcl\_Init\(\) is responsible for setting up the
     script library by evaluating the script _init.tcl_. It should be
     called after the creation of an interpreter, to add the various
     commands to it.

	   > If it can not find this script, it will return with an error.

	   > \(The routine actually has two additional hooks to allow
     customisation, but these will probably be used in unusual
     circumstances only.\)

The script _init.tcl_ and any it sources \(directly or indirectly
via auto\_load\) must be found via the _tcl\_library_ variable.
On UNIX this variable is initialised via the _TCL\_LIBRARY_ environment
variable is used, whereas on MS Windows the pathname of the Tcl DLLs
is used as well.

As long as these scripts can be found, they can actually reside in a
large number of directories with names related to the Tcl library path.

This leads to the following code to create a full-fledged interpreter:

	  Tcl_Interp * interp         ;
	
	  /* Initialise the Tcl library thouroughly
	  */
	  Tcl_FindExecutable( argv[0] ) ;
	
	  /* Create the interp, evaluate "init.tcl" for the script
	     level initialisation.
	  */
	  interp = Tcl_CreateInterp() ;
	
	  if ( Tcl_Init( interp ) != TCL_OK ) {
	     ... Report the error
	  }
	

With _init.tcl_ loaded, we have a number of additional commands and
global variables:

   * tclLog, unknown, auto\_load, auto\_execok are the most important
     ones.

   * auto\_path, errorInfo, errorCode

To create an interpreter that can handle Tk as well, you should be
aware of the following:

   * Tk-able interpreters always need to be initialised via Tk\_Init\(\)
     and therefore require the start-up scripts: these scripts contain
     the default bindings and resource definitions and are therefore
     indispensable for Tk.

   * An application written using Tk needs to process events in a
     well-defined event loop.

TODO: how to write the event loop, what choices are available?

# Initialisation via the standard shell

The details of the initialisation done in the standard tclsh shell
are quite intricate. They involve, in addition to the initialisation via
Tcl\_FindExecutable\(\) and Tcl\_Init\(\) also:

   * processing the command-line arguments

   * customisation via various hooks

   * preparing the Tcl parser by setting the locale to "C", as only
     this guarantees everything works as expected.

A summary of the steps found in the initialisation code is given below:

   * main\(\) is a system-dependent routine which:

	   > \* sets the locale \(Windows version\)

	   > \* parses the command-line according to the UNIX rules \(Windows
       version\)

	   > \* calls Tcl\_Main\(\), which is not supposed to return

   * Tcl\_Main\(\) takes as arguments the well-known _argc/argv_
     command-line arguments and a pointer to the initialisation routine,
     which in the case of _tclsh_ is Tcl\_AppInit\(\):

	   > \* After calling Tcl\_FindExecutable\(\), processing the
       command-line arguments and calling the initialisation routine,
       it can do either of two things:

	   > > \* Evaluate the script file, if the first argument does not
         start with a minus sign

	   > > \* Or go into an interactive loop to read the commands from
         the prompt. The preparation in that case is to evaluate
         the start-up script \(such as ~/.tclshrc or ~/tclshrc.tcl\)

	   > \* It exits by evaluating the Tcl "exit" command, not by calling
       the C routine _exit\(\)_ directly

   * The standard initialisation routine Tcl\_AppInit\(\) is meant to
     initialise the various application-specific commands and static
     packages via routines like Tcl\_CreateCommand\(\). It also sets the
     Tcl variable "tcl\_rcFile" to the user's start-up script.

	   > \(Curiously, the standard routine is found in a platform-dependent
     source file, tclXXXInit.c\)

   * Tcl\_Init\(\) by the way provides two hooks for customisation:

	   > \* A pre-initialisation script that gets evaluated when the
       static variable "tclPreInitScript" has been set.

	   > \* The initScript variable that defines a Tcl procedure that
       looks up the _init.tcl_ script.

Thus, before the shell is ready for processing, a lot of initialisation
is done. Much of this process can be customised without the need to
change the standard source files.

# Overview

This section provides an overview of the resources that an application
requires, given the type of usage:

_Bare Tcl only interpreter:_

   * Just the Tcl dynamic libraries

_Complete initialisation for Tcl only:_

   * The Tcl dynamic libraries

   * The environment variable TCL\_LIBRARY

   * The initialisation script file _init.tcl_

   * The character encoding tables \(optional\)

_Customised Tcl shell \(adapted Tcl\_AppInit\(\)\):_

   * The Tcl dynamic libraries

   * The environment variable TCL\_LIBRARY

   * The initialisation script file _init.tcl_

   * The character encoding tables \(optional\)

   * Possibly a so-called RC file to define the initialisation for
     interactive use

_Customised Tk shell \(wish; adapted Tk\_AppInit\(\)\):_

   * The Tcl and Tk dynamic libraries

   * The environment variables TCL\_LIBRARY and TK\_LIBRARY

   * The initialisation script file _init.tcl_, and the Tk specific
     bindings \(in _tk.tcl_ and others\)

   * The character encoding tables \(optional\)

   * Possibly a so-called RC file to define the initialisation for
     interactive use

Equally important are the limitations:

_Bare Tcl only interpreter:_

   * No customisable initialisation \(not automatically\)

   * No access to the command-line arguments or the directory
     that contains the executable

   * No alternative character encodings

   * Possibly problems loading packages, as the auxiliary procedures
     for this are defined in _init.tcl_ and others.

   * Possibly problems with the locale \(best to explicitly set it to
     "C"\)

   * No interactive use

_Complete initialisation for Tcl only:_

   * Possibly problems with the locale \(best to explicitly set it to
     "C"\)

   * No interactive use

_Customised Tcl shell \(adapted Tcl\_AppInit\(\)\):_

   * None

_Customised Tk shell \(wish; adapted Tk\_AppInit\(\)\):_

   * None

----

# Compiling and linking

Nowadays, it seems the default to use dynamic or shared libraries. So,
with many installations, there will exist dynamic versions of the
libraries and sometimes there will be no static versions. This has a
number of advantages:

   * The executables are much smaller, the memory usage can be smaller
     as well, as the code will be shared.

   * The libraries can be replaced without the need to rebuild the
     application. This is especially true if you enable the use of
     _stubs_ for your binary packages \(see below\).

However, as the Tcl libraries now reside outside your application, they
will have to be shipped with the application and the dynamic loader must
somehow be able to find the libraries. The latter certainly has
consequences: each system tends to have its own method.

When you have the Tcl/Tk sources, you can decide to create your own
libraries. Of special interest are the following two situations:

   * You want to be able to use the _stubs_ facility, as this makes
     it possible to run with different versions of Tcl/Tk with the same
     binary.

   * You want to get rid of as much extra stuff outside your application
     as possible, so you want to use the static version of the Tcl
     libraries.

_Stubs_ were introduced to make binary extensions and applications
independent of the specific Tcl version. They are enabled by defining
the macro _TCL\_USE\_STUBS_ during the compilation and linking
of the Tcl/Tk library and especially your own extension.

In the initialisation procedure for your pacakge or application you need
to initialise the stubs jump table via _Tcl\_InitStubs\(\)_:

	 #ifdef USE_TCL_STUBS
	    if (Tcl_InitStubs(interp, "8.1", 0) == NULL) {
	       return TCL_ERROR;
	    }
	 #endif

\(details: <http://mini.net/tcl/1687.html> \)

The technique, as Brent Welch explains, is simple in principle:

   > By enabling stubs, all calls to Tcl routines are turned into
     function pointers. These pointers are kept in a large table that
     is filled with the correct pointer values via the Tcl\_InitStubs\(\)
     routine.

Linking your application or extension should then be done against the
"stub version" of the Tcl/Tk libraries.

If you do not want dynamic libraries, then perhaps a build with the
option _STATIC\_BUILD_ is a solution. With this option, static
libraries are built. The libraries are then incorporated into the
executable itself.

_Note:_ On some platforms, notably Windows, the specific
calling convention is then turned to standard C \(with dynamic libraries,
the calling convention exports the various routines explicitly\).

When you do not care about the dynamic libraries having to be present,
at least be aware of the way the various systems want to define their
position.

The information above is summarised as follows:

_Using dynamic libraries:_

   * Most UNIX versions and LINUX use the environment
     variable LD\_LIBRARY\_PATH, colon-separated just like _PATH_
     to indicate the position of dynamic libraries.

   * Some use the variable SHLIB\_PATH instead \(notably: HPUX\).

   * Under Windows \(all flavours\) the PATH variable is used and a
     predefined sequence of directories to find the DLL's. One important
     case is that the libraries are found in the same directory as
     the executable.

_Building for general Tcl versions:_

   * Compile your sources with the macro _TCL\_USE\_STUBS_

   * Use the proper call to Tcl\_InitStubs\(\) to initialise the
     jump table.

   * Link against the stub versions of the Tcl/Tk libraries.

_Building statically:_

   * Use the flag STATIC\_BUILD to build the static Tcl/Tk libraries.

   * Use this flag for your own sources as well

   * Link against the static versions.

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain.

