# TIP 72: 64-Bit Value Support for Tcl on 32-Bit Platforms
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <fellowsd@cs.man.ac.uk>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        05-Nov-2001
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.4
-----

# Abstract

This TIP adds the capability to perform computations on values that
are \(at least\) 64-bits wide even on 32-bit platforms.  It also adds
support for handling files that are larger than 2GB large on those
platforms \(where supported by the underlying platform and filing
system\).

# Rationale

There have been a number of requests, and from a whole range of
application areas, for Tcl to be enhanced to handle 64-bit values even
on platforms where that is larger than the native word size, and the
vast majority of C compilers support a large enough arithmetic type
\(often called _long long_ though other names are common on the
Windows platform.\)  Such areas include:

 * _large-file support_ for people working with lots of data.  Note
   that at the moment Tcl cannot even report the file type for a file
   that is larger than 2GB in size.

 * _large value support_ for people working with network addresses
   \(this is likely to come up more in the future with IPv6.\)

However, a number of existing algorithms assume that integer
arithmetic operations wrap at 32-bits \(demonstrating the need for
_semantic backward-compatibility_ so termed because a recompile of
the C portions of the relevant code will not fix the problem\) and
there are many existing extensions that assume a particular word-size
too \(requiring _syntactic backward-compatibility_ because
recompilation will probably cure the problem.\)  Hence any upgrade of
Tcl's functionality must be done carefully so as to preserve as much
backward compatibility as possible.

# Proposed for Changes

To resolve this problem, I will introduce:

 1. A new pair of types at the C level to represent signed and
    unsigned values with a width of at least 64-bits.  These types
    will be called _Tcl\_WideInt_ and _Tcl\_WideUInt_ respectively.
    On 64-bit platforms \(and 32-bit platforms where there is no
    compiler support for arithmetic 64-bit types\) these will be
    typedef'ed to _long_ to preserve as much inter-platform
    compatibility as possible.

	 >  The type names are based on the term _Wide_ as opposed to either
    _Long_ or _LongLong_ because the first causes a problem with
    existing Tcl APIs \(_Tcl\_GetLongFromObj_ for example\) and the
    second because it is both longer and less mnemonic.  Not all Tcl
    platforms are built with compilers that understand _long long_
    in the first place, and the major factor in its favour at the C
    level was almost certainly the fact that it did not introduce any
    new reserved words into the C syntax which would have had a major
    backward-compatibility impact - we are not bound by such things
    and can choose to suit ourselves.

 2. A new field of type _Tcl\_WideInt_ in the internalRep union of
    the _Tcl\_Obj_ type.  Note that this is 100% backward compatible
    since the union already contains a field that is a pair of
    pointers \(each of which I assume to be at least 32-bits wide.\)  

 3. A new object type of 64-bit wide values together with accessor
    functions to create, modify and retrieve from objects of that type
    called _Tcl\_NewWideIntObj_, _Tcl\_SetWideIntObj_ and
    _Tcl\_GetWideIntFromObj_ \(on platforms where _Tcl\_WideInt_ is
    not distinct from _long_, these will be all redirected to the
    previously existing integer type.\)

 4. The [expr] command shall be reworked so that:

	 >  \* If a constant looks like a signed integer \(i.e. it lies between
      INT\_MIN and INT\_MAX inclusive\) it is treated as such.  Otherwise
      if it looks like an integer of any size, an attempt will be made
      to treat it like a wide integer, and if that fails or it doesn't
      look like an integer at all, it will be treated as a double.
      _Note_ that this will be a source of a potential backwards
      incompatibility with scripts that include values that are meant
      to be unsigned integers.

	 >  \* With arithmetic operations, the output will be a double if at
      least one of the operands is a double, a wide integer if at
      least one of the operands is a wide integer, and a normal
      integer otherwise.  \(The main exception to this will be the left
      and right shift operations where the type of the second operand
      will not affect the type of the result.\)

	 >  \* The _int\(\)_ pseudo-function will always return a non-wide
      integer \(converting by dropping the high bits\) and the new
      pseudo-function _wide\(\)_ will always return a wide integer
      \(converting by sign-extending.\)  On platforms without a distinct
      64-bit type, these operations will behave identically.

	 >  \* User-defined functions will be able to gain access to the wide
      integer through an extra _wideValue_ field in the
      _Tcl\_Value_ structure and TCL\_WIDE\_INT \(which will be the same
      as TCL\_INT on platforms without a distinct 64-bit type\) value in
      the _Tcl\_ValueType_ enumeration.

 5. The [incr] command will be able to increment variables
    containing 64-bit values correctly, but will only accept 32-bit
    values as amounts to increment by.

 6. _Tcl\_Seek_ and _Tcl\_Tell_ \(together will all channel drivers\)
    will be updated to use the new 64-bit type for offsets \(which will
    reflect at the Tcl level in the [seek] and [tell] commands\)
    though a compatibility interface for old extensions that do not
    supply a channel driver will be maintained \(though the size of
    offset reportable through the interface will naturally be limited.\)

 7. _Tcl\_FSStat_ and _Tcl\_FSLstat_ will all be
    updated to use a stat structure reference that can contain 64-bit
    wide values.  This will enable various [file] subcommands \(and
    [glob] with some options\) to work correctly with files over 2GB
    in size.  Note that there is no neat way to do this in a backward
    compatible way as there is currently no guarantee on which fields
    will actually be present in the structure, but those functions
    have never been available outside an alpha...

	 >  Because the name of a suitable structure varies considerably
    between platforms, a new type, _Tcl\_StatBuf_, will be declared
    to be the type of the structure which a pointer to should be
    passed to the stat-related functions. A new function,
    _Tcl\_AllocStatBuf_, will be provided to allow extensions to
    allocate a buffer of the correct size whatever the platform.

	 >  Note that _Tcl\_Stat_ will written to contain
    backward-compatability code so that code that references it will
    work unchanged.

 8. The _format_ and _scan_ commands will gain a significance to
    the _l_ modifier to their integer-handling conversion specifiers
    \(d, u, i, o and x\) which will tell them to work with 64-bit values
    \(if those are not the default for the platform anyway.\)

 9. The _binary_ command will gain new _w_ and _W_ specifiers
    for its _format_ and _scan_ subcommands.  These will operate
    on 64-bit wide values in a fashion analogous to the existing _i_
    and _I_ specifiers \(i.e. smallest byte to largest, and largest
    byte to smallest respectively.\)

 10. New compatibility functions will also be provided, because not
     all platforms have convenient equivalent functions to _strtoll_
     and _strtoull_.

 11. _Tcl\_LinkVar_ will be extended to be given the ability to link
     with a wide C variable \(via a TCL\_LINK\_WIDE\_INT flag\).

 12. The _tcl\_platform_ array will gain a new member, _wordSize_,
     which will give the native size of machine words on the host
     platform \(actually whatever _sizeof\(long\)_ returns.\)

# Summary of Incompatibilities and Fixes

The behaviour of expressions containing constants that appear positive
but which have a negative internal representation will change, as
these will now usually be interpreted as wide integers.  This is
always fixable by replacing the constant with _int\(_constant_\)_.

Extensions creating new channel types will need
to be altered as different types are now in use in those areas.  The
change to the declaration of _Tcl\_FSStat_ and _Tcl\_FSLstat_ \(which
are the new preferred API in any case\) are less serious as no
non-alpha releases have been made yet with those API functions.

Scripts that are lax about the use of the _l_ modifier in _format_
and _scan_ will probably need to be rewritten.  This should be very
uncommon though as previously it had absolutely no effect.

Extensions that create new math functions that take more than one
argument will need to be recompiled \(the size of _Tcl\_Value_
changes\), and functions that accept arguments of any type
\(_TCL\_EITHER_\) will need to be rewritten to handle wide integer
values.  \(I do not expect this to affect many extensions at all.\)

# Why Tcl\_WideInt?

I chose the name _Tcl\_WideInt_ for the type because it represents a
wider-than-normal integer.  Alternatives that were considered and
rejected were:

 Tcl\_LongLong: This takes its name from the name of the underlying C
    type used in many UNIX compilers, but that in turn was chosen
    because it meant that no new keywords would be added to the
    language, and not out of any feeling that the type name itself is
    of any wider merit. Seeing as Tcl is a keyword-less language, there
    is no particular reason for going down this route \(which would
    lead to things like a _longlong\(\)_ type conversion function added
    to the [expr] command, which is really very ugly indeed...\) It
    is also not universally the name of the underlying type; the Windows
    world is different \(as usual.\)

 Tcl\_Int64: This name, by contrast, comes more from the Windows world.
    It's major problem is that it specifies eternally what the size of
    the type is, whereas at some point in the future \(when 64-bit words
    are the norm\) we may want to support something wider still \(though
    I do not yet know what uses we would put 128-bit integers to.\)  I
    believe that the name of a type is part of its specification, but
    that the size of the type is less so.  _Tcl\_Int64_ is also ugly
    when it comes to derivations of the name for things like the type
    converter in [expr] \(again\) and the names of variables containing
    values of the type \(internally, as formal parameters, and as fields
    of structures\) and may well clash on systems where the C compiler
    gives real meaning to _int64_ by default.  By contrast,
    _Tcl\_WideInt_ lends itself well to generating variable names
    \(_wideValue_, _widePtr_, etc., and even just plain _w_ in the
    implementation of the bytecode execution engine\) which, as the
    person implementing the changes, was a major consideration.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

