# TIP 8: Add Winico support to the wm command on windows
	Author:        Vince Darley <vince.darley@eurobios.com>
	State:         Final
	Type:          Project
	Tcl-Version:   8.4.0
	Vote:          Done
	Created:       06-Nov-2000
	Post-History:
-----

# Abstract

Add to _wm_ the ability to do the windows-titlebar-icon manipulation
that the Winico extension currently provides, without the bugs noted
in that extension.

# Proposal

Modify _wm_ on Windows only to allow an optional _-default_ argument.

	wm iconbitmap .winpath ?-default? filename

And to allow a file which is of valid windows-icon format to be
interpreted as such.  Any file which is not correctly interpreted
as an icon will be handled as before, by the _bitmap_ code \(which
will generally either do nothing, or throw an error, thus maintaining
backwards compatibility\).

The _-default_ argument, if given, will change not the icon of the
.winpath given, but rather the default icon for all windows in the
current application for which no specific icon as been set.

An implementation already exists, which fixes the basic "wrapper
window" problems and which has the above syntax.  The issues
surrounding reference counting of icons in use has also been addressed
in this patch so that icons no longer in use are released \(the Winico
patch required manual deletion of icons\).  This reference
implementation is available from
ftp://ftp.ucsd.edu/pub/alpha/tcl/tkWinWm.diff \(documentation has been
separately patched, and can also be made available\).

# Rationale

There have been many requests on news:comp.lang.tcl for this ability
in the Tk core, and several bug reports filed against Winico, and this
ability has been placed on the Tk 8.4 roadmap.
<http://purl.org/tcl/home/software/tcltk/roadmap.tml>

The choice of _wm iconbitmap_ is suggested, because _wm
iconbitmap_ currently doesn't appear to do anything on Windows, yet
is the obvious choice for the user trying to set the window's icon
\(e.g. many posts on news:comp.lang.tcl are actually asking why _wm
iconbitmap_ doesn't do anything\).

In the future we may wish to extend _wm iconbitmap_ on all platforms
so that other image types can be accepted \(e.g. .gif, .png\).  This
proposal extends naturally to allow such future work.  The primary
changes required will be icon<->image conversion routines.

# Alternatives

Fix the core so that Winico can work properly as an extension.

My implementation as shown that this would require a couple of
patches, and also the exporting of an additional obscure function into
Tk's stub table \(a function which would ensure that Tk's window
manager is completely initialised\).  It would also not help the users
posting to news:comp.lang.tcl asking "why doesn't wm iconbitmap do
anything?"

# Objections

_This is platform specific and should go in an extension_

See _Alternatives_ above, also see the _future suggestion_ above
in which this kind of code can be usefully extended in a
cross-platform way.

_The -default flag is weird, and it means we ignore the window name_

I agree, but please suggest a better alternative rather than just
moaning.  The command with the -default flag is in my opinion more
useful than the command without \(for example it makes sure that Tk's
built-in dialogs have the icon of your application\).  An alternative
might be to use _wm iconbitmap -default filename_, but that involves
more significant modifications of the semantics of _wm_.  It might,
however, be a good idea.

_wm iconbitmap will still do nothing when given a bitmap_

Yes, but there's that backwards compatibility issue.  This should be
properly documented with pointers to the use of valid icon file
formats.  When or if proper support is added to Tk for .gif, .png or
even Tk images as icons, this bug can be fixed.  The purpose of this
TIP is not to fix that bug, but to provide a better solution.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

