# TIP 87: Allow Tcl Access to the Recursion Limit
	Author:         Stephen Trier <sct@po.cwru.edu>
	Author:         Richard Suchenwirth <richard.suchenwirth-bauersachs@siemens.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        19-Feb-2002
	Post-History:   
	Discussions-To: news:comp.lang.tcl
	Keywords:       Tcl_SetRecusionLimit,recursion limit
	Tcl-Version:    8.4
	Tcl-Ticket:     522849
-----

# Abstract

An extension to the [interp] command, [interp recursionlimit],
will permit Tcl scripts to control their own recursion limits.  Until
now, this limit has been changeable from a C API, but not from within
Tcl.

# Rationale

As of Tcl 8.4a3, Tcl scripts must live with the default recursion
depth of 1000 nested calls to the _Tcl\_Eval_ family of functions or
resort to C code to change the limit.  Nevertheless, Tcl programmers
may find it useful to reduce the limit when debugging or to increase
it for scripts that include deeply recursive functions.  The changes
proposed in this TIP will make this possible in pure Tcl code.

# Specification

 generic/tclInterp.c: Add subcommands to [interp] and to the slave
   interpreter object command with the following syntax:

 > interp recursionlimit _path_ _?newlimit?_

 > _slave_ recursionlimit _?newlimit?_

 > The parameter _newlimit_ must be a positive integer.  When it is
   present, the limit is changed to _newlimit_ and the command
   returns the new recursion limit.  If the _newlimit_ parameter is
   absent, the command returns the current recursion limit.

 > No maximum value is enforced.  It is the programmer's
   responsibility to ensure the recursion limit will not overflow the
   process stack.

 > A safe interpreter is not allowed to change the recursion limit for
   itself nor for any other interpreter.  Attempting to do so will
   generate an error.  Safe interpreters are allowed to query
   recursion limits.

 > If an interpreter changes its own recursion limit to a value lower
   than the current Tcl\_Eval nesting level, the limit will be
   changed, then an error message appropriate to this particular
   situation will be issued by the recursionlimit command.
   \(Error text: "falling back due to new recursion limit"\)

 > If an interpreter changes a sub-interpreter's recursion limit to
   less than the sub-interpreter's current Tcl\_Eval nesting level,
   no immediate error is issued.  The sub-interpreter will throw a
   "too many nested calls to Tcl\_Eval \(infinite loop?\)" error if
   its nesting is still deeper than its recursion limit when next
   a command is executed in its context.

 generic/tclTest.c: Remove the now-unnecessary testsetrecursionlimit
   command.

 doc/interp.n: Add documentation for the new subcommands, including a
   warning about stack overflow, much like the warning in the
   documentation for _Tcl\_SetRecursionLimit\(\)_.

 test/interp.test: Add tests for the new subcommands.

# Comments Received

Discussion of this TIP took place in the following threads:

<http://groups.google.com/groups?hl=en&threadm=3C6D0A88.5DC9D8B4%40utdt.edu>

<http://groups.google.com/groups?hl=en&threadm=3C73E98A.8ED9DDE6%40cisco.com>

<http://www.geocrawler.com/mail/thread.php3?subject=%5BTCLCORE%5D\+TIP\+%2387%3A\+Allow\+Tcl\+Access\+to\+the\+Recursion\+Limit&list=7375>

Using a command or variable _::tcl::recursionLimit_ to manipulate
the limit was initially considered, but Miguel Sofer suggested making
the function a subcommand of [interp] because the recursion limit is
logically an attribute of each interpreter.  Miguel also pointed out that implementing _TclpCheckStackSpace\(\)_ for Unix would mitigate
the dangers of setting the recursion limit too high.

comp.lang.tcl saw some discussion of whether it would be appropriate to have a way to completely remove the recursion limit. The consensus was to not add such a feature.

The initial version of this TIP did not provide for a diagnostic error message for the case where the nesting is already deeper than the new recursion level. Ken Fitch, Don Porter, Miguel Sofer, and Donal Fellows discussed whether this was important. This version of the TIP uses Donal Fellows's suggestion of changing the recursion limit as requested, but providing a meaningful error message if the nesting is too deep for the new limit.

Donal Fellows suggested that slave interpreters should inherit their recursion limit from their parent. As it turns out, this behavior was already present but was not documented. The reference implementation documents it.

# Reference Implementation

An implementation of this TIP, with tests and documentation, is patch number 522849 on SourceForge.

# Copyright

This document is in the public domain.

