# TIP 91: Backward Compatibility for Channel Types with 32-bit SeekProcs
	State:		Final
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.4
	Vote:		Done
	Post-History:	
	Author:		Donal K. Fellows <fellowsd@cs.man.ac.uk>
	Created:	03-May-2002
-----

# Abstract

[[72]](72.md) broke backward-compatibility for channels that supported the
[seek] command, and this TIP adds the ability for old-style channels
to work with the underlying 64-bit architecture.

# Rationale

Although the ability to work with large files \(as added by [[72]](72.md)\) is
crucially useful in many situations, it has introduced a few problems,
one of which being that it broke backward compatibility for channel
types \(see
<http://sourceforge.net/tracker/?func=detail&atid=410295&aid=551677&group\_id=34191>
for details.\)  Following discussion with the people concerned, I
believe it is possible to modify the channel type structure so that
old-style channels - i.e. those compiled against Tcl 8.3 - can still
be supported \(though with a limited range of operation.\)

# Proposed Change

The _Tcl\_ChannelType_ structure will have an extra field appended of
type _Tcl\_DriverWideSeekProc_ called _wideSeekProc_, which shall
be guaranteed to be present \(though possibly NULL\) whenever the
version of the _Tcl\_ChannelType_ structure is at least
_TCL\_CHANNEL\_VERSION\_3_.  The type _Tcl\_DriverSeekProc_ shall be
reverted to its pre-[[72]](72.md) version, with the current type of
_Tcl\_DriverSeekProc_ being transferred to the type
_Tcl\_DriverWideSeekProc_.  In order to facilitate stacked channels,
an additional requirement shall be imposed that if a channel driver
implements a _wideSeekProc_, then it shall also implement a
_seekProc_, so allowing stacked channels to work entirely in one
domain or the other \(well, in simple cases at least.\)

Semantically, the core will handle seeks by preferring to use a
_wideSeekProc_ if present, and using the _seekProc_ otherwise.
Considering just the case where the _seekProc_ is used, if the
offset argument exceeds that which is representable in a _long_,
_Tcl\_Seek_ will fail, simulating a system error of EOVERFLOW.

The only Tcl core channel which will need modification is the _file_
channel; this will be adapted to generate an error of EOVERFLOW when
the resulting offset in a file would otherwise exceed that which can
be expressed in a _long_ \(which has the downside of making the seek
operation no longer atomic when using the old interface, since the
file offset will need to be restored to its old position in such
cases.\)  On 64-bit platforms, both _seekProc_ and _wideSeekProc_
will be the same function.

# Rejected Alternatives

I considered overloading the _seekProc_ field to have different
types depending on the value of the _version_ field, but that's
remarkably ugly and forces people to adapt rapidly at a source level.
I don't know about everyone else, but I don't use a lot of programs at
the moment that actually need access to files larger than 2GB.

I also considered allowing code to only implement the _wideSeekProc_
but it was easier to code the way I ended up doing it and I don't
think there are that many people writing channel drivers that support
seeking anway.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

