# TIP 92: Move Package Load Decisions to Application Developer
	Author:		Clif Flynt <clif@cflynt.com>
	State:		Withdrawn
	Type:		Project
	Vote:		Pending
	Created:	13-May-2002
	Post-History: 
	Tcl-Version:	8.4
	Keywords:	package require, namespace, pkg_mkIndex
-----

# Abstract

This TIP makes the loading of packages far more flexible, so as to
better support their use by application authors in situations above
and beyond those foreseen by the developer of the package.

# Overview

I believe that we've been misdirecting our efforts in solutions to
the Package issue.

 * The modifications to _pkg\_mkIndex_ give the library author \(or
   package builder\) the ability to define when a package will be
   loaded \(immediate or deferred\), which restricts an application
   developer to the decisions made by the library author.

 * If a package is built to be loaded immediately, it is loaded into
   the top-level namespace.  This breaks previous tricks to force a
   package to load inside an existing namespace.

These techniques limit the application writer to the behavior \(and
uses\) envisioned by the package author and is counter to the concept
that application developer best understands how they need a tool to
perform for their application.  The Tcl community, in particular, has
grown largely because the tools have had applications far beyond those
imagined by their initial developers.

Moving the decisions about when and how to load a package from
_pkg\_mkIndex_ to the _package require_ command allows the
application writer the freedom to find new styles of use that the
package author may not have conceived.

Being able to force an immediate load into the current namespace
rather than always loading packages into the global scope provides
support for lightweight object style data structures without the need
for extensions like Incr Tcl, OOTcl, etc.

Loading a package/namespace into the current namespace provides
mechanisms for lightweight inheritance, and since namespaces can
contain both code and data, loading a namespace multiple times \(in
separate namespaces\) is a lightweight aggregation model.

I do not propose that this power removes the need for full object
oriented programming models within the Tcl community.  However, I
believe that putting the power to develop these lightweight models
into the application developer provides the developer with a more
versatile tool kit than they currently have.  \(One that I've been
using for several years, with workarounds.\)

This proposal is to add new flags to the package require command,
allowing an application developer to determine when and how to load a
package.

 -current: Load the package into the current namespace rather than the
	global space.  Implies immediate.

 -multiple: Allow loading multiple copies of this package, for use
	with _-current_ when the application programmer wishes to
	create multiple nested copies of a package.

 -immediate: Load immediately, rather than defer loading the package
	until needed.  This is the default behavior with Tcl 8.3 and
	later.

 -defer: Load package when required.  The default with Tcl 8.2 and
	earlier, or when _pkg\_mkIndex -lazy_ used with Tcl 8.3.

 -exact: No change to this option.  Requires an exact Major/Minor
	revision match to be an acceptable package.

# Script Example

The code below implements a simple stack object that can be merged
into other namespaces to create objects that contain individual
stacks.

	 package provide stack 1.0
	 namespace eval stack {
	     namespace export push pop peek size
	     variable stack ""
	     
	     proc push {val} {
	         variable stack;
	         lappend stack $val
	     }
	      
	     proc pop {} {
	         variable stack;
	         set rtn [lindex $stack end]
	         set stack [lrange $stack 0 end-1]
	         return $rtn
	         }
	 
	     proc peek {{pos end}} {
	         variable stack;
	         return [lindex $stack $pos]
	     }
	      
	     proc size {} {
	         variable stack;
	         return [llength $stack]
	     }
	      
	 }
	  

With this data structure available, the guts of a Tower of Hanoi
puzzle becomes simple:

	 namespace eval left {
	         package require -current -multiple  stack 1.0
	         namespace import [namespace current]::stack::*
	     }   
	 namespace eval center {
	         package require -current -multiple  stack 1.0
	         namespace import [namespace current]::stack::*
	     }
	 namespace eval right {
	         package require -current -multiple  stack 1.0
	         namespace import [namespace current]::stack::*
	     }
	      
	 proc move {from to} {
	         ${to}::push [${from}::pop]
	     }

This creates 3 'objects' each of which contains a private stack with
the stack methods.

# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation of the _-current_ and _-multiple_
flags has been created for Tcl 8.4a4 and is available at
<http://noucorp.com/PkgPatch8.4.zip>

The implementation required these modifications to
_generic/tclPkg.c_:

 * _Tcl\_PackageObjCmd_ needs to be able to parse the new options and
   set the bitmapped flag.

 * _Tcl\_PkgRequireEx_ is modified to accept a bitmapped flag instead
   of the _exact_ option.

 * The 0x0001 bitmap position is used to map for _exact_ preserving
   the existing behavior of the _Tcl\_PackageObjCmd_ and
   _Tcl\_PkgRequireEx_ functions.

 * These bitmapped flags are defined exact, current, and multiple:

		#define PKG_EXACT    0x01   /* Use the exact version - as used for exact */
		#define PKG_CURRENT  0x02   /* Load into current namespace, not GLOBAL */
		#define PKG_MULTIPLE 0x04   /* Allow loading multiple copies of a package */

 * _Tcl\_PkgRequireEx_ is modified to process the MULTIPLE and
   CURRENT flags.

 * The Tcl tests have been reworked to understand the new error
   returns, etc.  Running "make tests" will accept the new code.

Minimal testing has been done using pure Tcl packages.  

