# TIP 93: Get/Delete Enhancement for the Tk Text Widget
	Author:         Craig Votava <craig@lucent.com>
	Author:         Donal K. Fellows <fellowsd@cs.man.ac.uk>
	Author:         Jeff Hobbs <JeffH@ActiveState.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        28-Dec-2001
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.4
-----

# Abstract

The Tk Text widget provides text tags, which are a very powerful
thing.  However, the current implementation does not provide an
efficient way for a Tk Text widget programmer to extract \(get\) all of
the actual text that has a given text tag.  This TIP proposes to
enhance the Tk Text widget to provide this functionality.

# Rationale

While writing applications using the Tk Text widget, I find myself
wanting to extract all of the text that has a given text tag.
Although this is possible with the existing functionality of the Tk
Text widget, it can become extremely inefficient, depending on your
application.

Consider the example where we load a text widget with say, the
contents of a scene from a play, and we tag all of the spoken passages
with the name of the character that utters them.  How can we provide
an efficient way to allow an end user to print out all the spoken text
for a single given character?

My initial impulse was to design something like this \(please excuse
the use of Perl-Tk syntax, that's what I'm most comfortable with\):

	   $txt->tagGet($tag);

The problem with this design is what should this return? A string?  An
list? If a list, should it be a list of each tagged character?  A list
of strings containing all contiguous characters? In addition, Steve
Lidie points out that the corresponding tagDelete\(\) command would
also have to be modified to mimic this change as well. This line of
thought got icky pretty fast.

My second impulse was to try to induce this functionality with as much
existing stuff as possible.  The _tagRanges_ command returns a list
of index pairs for all contiguous characters with a given tag.  The
thought here was to combine that command with the _get_ command to
get all the text with a given tag:

	   $txt->get( $txt->tagRanges($tag) );

This design seems to fit in well with much of the existing
functionality of the text widget.  The main problem here is that the
existing _get_ command only allows for either one or two arguments,
and returns a single string.  For this design to be implemented, the
get interface would need to be enhanced.  This is the design I chose
to implement as a reference \(prototype\) implementation.  I believe
that the functionality should be provided in the Tk Text widget, and
believe that this prototype solution could be turned into a production
solution.  However those decisions I happily leave up to the Tk
developers who are more knowledgeable about the Tk Text implementation
than myself.

An additional concern here involves the corresponding text delete
command. Should the delete command also be modified in a similar way so
that it has this same functionality too? It seems like it should.

# Specification

This specification will only describe how the reference implementation
was produced.  If it is decided that an alternate design is needed for
the final production solution, this specification can be scrapped.

The goal of this design is to enhance the Tk Text _get_ command from
accepting only one or two arguments, to accepting any number of 1
\(\+NULL\) or 2 arguments sets.  The Tcl-Tk manual page description would
change from this:

	   $t get i1 ?i2?

to something like this:

	   $t get i1 ?i2? ?(i3 ?i4? ...)?

By providing this enhancement, we give the programmer with the ability
to efficiently _get_ all of the text that is tagged with a given
tag.  The programmer would do this by using a compound statement
utilizing the existing _tag ranges_ command along with the enhanced
_get_ command, as follows \(the examples are using the Perl-Tk
syntax\):

	   $txt->get( $txt->tagRanges($tag) );

In addition, the enhancement will preserve compatibility with all of
the existing Tk _get_ commands currently in use.

Currently, the _get_ command simply returns a single string
containing all of the characters specified by the first and
\(optionally\) the second argument\(s\).  The enhanced _get_ command
will preserve this existing functionality:

	   my $chr = $text->get('1.0');

 > This command functions exactly the same as the original _get_
   command.  It will return a string containing the first character
   from the first line.

	   my $str = $text->get('1.0', '1.0 lineend');

 > This command functions exactly the same as the original _get_
   command.  It will return a string containing all of the characters
   on the first line.

However, if the programmer provides more than one or two argument\(s\),
the enhanced _get_ command will return a list of strings, just as if
the original _get_ command was called multiple times and the results
were loaded into a programmer-defined list:

	   my @lines = $text->get('1.0', '1.0 lineend', '2.0');

 > This command returns a list whose first element \(_$lines[[0]](0.md)_\)
   is a string containing all of the characters from the first line,
   and the second element \(_$lines[[1]](1.md)_\) is a string containing
   just the first character of the second line.

	   my @lines = $text->get('1.0', '', '2.0', '2.0 lineend');

 > This command returns a list whose first element \(_$lines[[0]](0.md)_\)
   is a string containing just the first character from the first
   line, and the second element \(_$lines[[1]](1.md)_\) is a string
   containing all of the characters on the second line.

	   my @lines = $text->get('1.0', '1.0 lineend', '2.0', '2.0 lineend');

 > This command returns a list whose first element \(_$lines[[0]](0.md)_\)
   is a string containing the all of the characters from the first
   line, and the second element \(_$lines[[1]](1.md)_\) is a string
   containing all of the characters from the second line.

All of this paves the way for the programmer to use the compound command:

	   my @lines = $txt->get( $txt->tagRanges($tag) );

 > This command returns a list whose elements are strings of all the
   contiguous characters tagged with a given tag.

# Example

The following Perl-Tk code illustrates how the enhanced _get_
command could be used with the existing _tag ranges_ command to
efficiently extract all of the text that is tagged with a given tag.

	   #! /usr/local/bin/perl -w
	   
	   require 5.005;
	   
	   use strict;
	   use English;
	   
	   use Tk;
	   
	   # Create main window with button and text widget in it...
	   my $top = MainWindow->new;
	   my $btn = $top->Button(-text=>'print odd lines')->pack;
	   my $txt = $top->Scrolled('Text', -relief=>'sunken', -borderwidth=>'2',
		-setgrid=>'true', -height=>'30', -scrollbars=>'e');
	   $txt->pack(-expand=>'yes', -fill=>'both');
	   $btn->configure(-command=>sub{&GetText($txt)} );
	   
	   # Populate text widget with lines tagged odd and even...
	   my $lno;
	   my $oddeven;
	   foreach $lno (1..20) {
		if($lno % 2) { $oddeven = "odd" } else { $oddeven = "even" };
		$lno = "Line $lno ($oddeven)\n";
		$txt->insert ('end', $lno, $oddeven);
	   }
	   
	   # Do the main processing loop...
	   MainLoop();
	   
	   sub GetText {
		my $txtobj = shift;
	
		$txtobj->tag('configure', 'odd', -background=>'lightblue');
		$txtobj->tag('configure', 'even', -background=>'lightgreen');
	
		# This is the goal of all the work...
		my @lines = $txtobj->get($txtobj->tagRanges('odd'));
	
		print STDERR join("", @lines);
	   }

# Reference Implementation

The patch for this reference implementation has been posted to the ptk
mailing list. An archived version is available at:

<http://faqchest.dynhost.com/prgm/ptk-l/ptk-01/ptk-0112/ptk-011201/ptk01122716\_24437.html>

I have written and run a single benchmark test \(in Perl-Tk\) to compare
this reference implementation against a traditional method of
extracting all text with a specific tag.  The results of this specific
benchmark test \(tagging odd lines _odd_ and even lines _even_ in a
text window with 2000 entries\), run on my computer are as follows:

	Reference Implementation   0.105 CPU Seconds (average over 10 runs)
	Traditional Method         0.443 CPU Seconds (average over 10 runs)

I believe that both the CPU the efficiency, and the coding efficiency
that this reference implementation provides, merit the change to the
Tk Widget.  In addition to the _get_ enhancement, the symmetrical changes would be make to the _delete_ subcommand.

_The patch has received little testing so far, so any testing is
encouraged._

# Notes on Equivalent Behaviour in Tcl/Tk

Tcl has less of a need for this than Perl because it has a striding
[foreach] allowing the list of indices returned by the [$t tag
ranges] subcommand to be traversed in a straight-forward fashion, but
this sort of functionality is still useful.  The motivating examples
above become \(in order\):

	   set lines [$t get 1.0 "1.0 lineend" 2.0]
	   set lines [$t get 1.0 {} 2.0 "2.0 lineend"]
	   set lines [$t get 1.0 "1.0 lineend" 2.0 "2.0 lineend"]
	   set lines [eval $t get [$t tag ranges]]

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

