# TIP 95: Add [wm attributes] Command
	Author:         Jeff Hobbs <JeffH@ActiveState.com>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        29-May-2002
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.4
	Tk-Ticket:      553926
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes adding a [wm attributes] command in order to
control platform-specific aspects of a toplevel.  In addition, it
proposes making [wm] a _Tcl\_Obj_-based command and centralizing
the common functionality.

# Rationale

While Tk has been proven useful over time as a cross-platform toolkit,
it has some serious drawbacks in acceptance due to small, but
important, lacking functionality in the handling of toplevel windows
on certain platforms.  Having a toplevel stay on top on Windows is a
prime example of a commonly requested feature for which there is no
core support.  Mac/Tk has long had a special unknown command to
support special styles needed for proper "look and feel" there.  I
hereby propose a [wm attributes] command \(like the [file
attributes] command\) to providing platform-specific functionality for
toplevel windows.

# Specification

	   wm attributes $toplevel ...
	   [[WINDOWS]]
	        ?-disabled ?bool??
	        ?-toolwindow ?bool??
	        ?-topmost ?bool??
	        ?-minimizebox ?bool??
	        ?-maximizebox ?bool??
	        ?-sysmenu ?bool??
	   [[MAC]]
	        ?-style ?alert|moveablealert|modal|moveablemodal|
	                 floating|document ...??
	   [[UNIX]]
	        <empty at this time>

Because Tk started off on Unix, most potential attributes are already
in the wm command, whether they really make sense across platforms or
not \(some equivalent has been emulated in most cases\).  If someone
feels that there are some X window attributes that Tk does not
support, this would be the place to put them.

On Windows, most of the attribute settings can be combined \(they are
OR-ed bits of special style fields on a toplevel\), which is why they
are set or retrieved as booleans.  The names reflect their Win32 API
bits.  For Windows and the Mac, the naming of attributes and/or styles
mirrors the native API as closely as possible, as we are exposing
native platform functionality in this command.  More specifics about
Windows styles can be seen here:

 > <http://msdn.microsoft.com/library/default.asp?url=/library/en-us/dnwui/html/msdn\_styles32.asp>

For Macs, styles are mutually exclusive, so you set one of a list of
available styles.  MacOS has nine standard window types and eight
standard floating window types.  More information can be seen here:

 > <http://developer.apple.com/techpubs/quicktime/qtdevdocs/INMAC/MACWIN/imWindowMgrRef.3.htm>

# Reference Implementation

Mac/Tk has a reference implementation already that would just adapt
the existing _unsupported1_ code to _wm attributes_.  There are
two variant patches for the Windows work in Tk patch 553926 at SF.

File: _tk/mac/tkMacWm.c_

File: _tk/win/tkWinWm.c_

File: _tk/unix/tkUnixWm.c_

Function: _Tk\_WmCmd_

# Comments

Several names have been used for a command with similar functionality.
Mac/Tk uses the _style_ command, as does Tk Patch 553926.  This is
only for platform-specific configuration of toplevel windows, and it
not necessarily limited to style.  I considered _wm configure_, but
I chose _wm attributes_ because that worked just as well and had the
equivalent of _file attributes_ to support the naming.

Windows toplevels could have more special styles like
_-transparent_, Windows scrollbars on the toplevel and a few other
window styles that the Win32 API supports.  Only the styles that have
had user requests are supported at this time.  We may want to add
_-caption_ and _-dialogmodal_ support if these seem useful.

It was recommended that commonality be reached where possible, but
this tip addresses most specifically what isn't common across the
minute aspects of toplevel window handing on different platforms.  For
examples, for Windows to allow TOPMOST, it keeps a special list of the
topmost windows.  This manager-level support is necessary to avoid
contention amongst topmost windows.  Macintosh has many special dialog
and window styles to represent both changing UI design over time, as
well as the latest in UI design that can be reached standard for Mac
toplevels but not Unix or Windows ones.

It may be that certain functionality will become cross-platform as
native APIs develop, but this is meant to allow access to key native
look and feel features that Tk lacks for serious developers now.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

