# TIP 97: Moving Vertices of Canvas Items
	Author:		Agnar Renolen <agnar.renolen@emap.no>
	Author:		Donal K. Fellows <donal.k.fellows@manchester.ac.uk>
	State:		Final
	Type:		Project
	Tcl-Version:	8.6
	Vote:		Done
	Created:	07-Jun-2002
	Post-History:	
	Keywords:	Tk
-----

# Abstract

This TIP proposes a canvas subcommand \(or possibly two\) that allows for
replacing characters in text objects and to move individual vertices of line
and polygon items.

# Rationale

Interactive graphics programs often allow users to modify shapes of objects by
selecting and dragging the vertices. Moving one vertex of a canvas item in the
current version of Tk, \(at least as far as I can find out from the
documentation\), can only be done by first removing the coordinate by
**dchars** and then insert the new one by **insert**, or for geometric
items like lines and polygons using the **coords** command to obtain and
reset the coordinates, after having modified the coordinate list by
**lreplace**.

The most important issue here, I think, is performance. I believe that the
current way of moving a vertex can be slow in some scenarios.

The **rchars** canvas subcommand is proposed merely to conform with the
**dchars** and **insert** commands, which both operate on lines, polygons
and text items, hence **rchars** should do that as well.

# Specification

Two canvas widget subcommands are proposed: **imove** and **rchars**. The
following subcommand is proposed to move a vertex of any canvas item:

 > _canvas_ **imove** _tagOrID index x y_

This subcommand will move the _index_th coordinate of the items identified by
_tagOrID_ to the new position given by _x_ and _y_. The _index_ value
will be processed according to normal canvas index rules \(see the INDICES
section of the **canvas** manual\). The subcommand will only work for line
and polygon items \(or any third party items that set the TK\_MOVABLE\_POINTS
flag\).

The following command provides a similar functionality, but conforms to the
model of the current **insert** and **dchars** subcommands.

 > _canvas_ **rchars** _tagOrID first last string_

This command will:

 for text items: replace the characters in the range _first_ and _last_
    \(inclusive\) with the characters in _string_.

 for line and polygon items: replace the coordinates in the range _first_
    and _last_ \(inclusive\) with the coordinate list specified in _string_
    \(subject to the requirement that the coordinate list is an even number of
    floating point numbers\).

In both cases, _first_ and _last_ will be processed according to the rules
in the INDICES section of the **canvas** manual page.

At the C level, the only change is the addition of a new flag,
**TK\_MOVABLE\_POINTS**. If this flag is set in the _alwaysRedraw_ field of
the item type structure, it implies that the item supplies non-NULL
_dcharsProc_, _indexProc_ and _insertProc_ fields, and gives them
semantics equivalent to the line and polygon items \(i.e. that the methods will
work with the coordinate list\). Note that text items, despite having all the
required methods, do not set the flag because those methods work with
character indices.

## Notes

The **imove** subcommand is not strictly necessary as the **rchars**
subcommand can be used to obtain the same result. However, I believe that a
separate **imove** subcommand will be easier to understand for users than
the **rchars** subcommand, though the latter is still necessary as it allows
for more complex processing such as insertion or deletion of points.

# Reference Implementation

See Patch 2157629<https://sourceforge.net/support/tracker.php?aid=2157629> .

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

