# TIP 99: Add 'file link' to Tcl
	Author:         Vince Darley <vincentdarley@users.sourceforge.net>
	State:          Final
	Type:           Project
	Vote:           Done
	Created:        11-Jun-2002
	Post-History:   
	Tcl-Version:    8.4
-----

# Abstract

Tcl can read links, but cannot create them.  This TIP proposes adding
a _file link_ subcommand to allow cross-platform creation of links.

# Proposal

Add a new subcommand with the following syntax:

	      file link ?-linktype? linkName ?target?

If only one argument is given, that argument is assumed to be
_linkName_, and this command returns the value of the link given by
_linkName_ \(i.e. the name of the file it points to\).  If
_linkName_ isn't a link or its value cannot be read \(as, for
example, seems to be the case with hard links, which look just like
ordinary files\), then an error is returned.

If 2 arguments are given, then these are assumed to be _linkName_
and _target_.  If _linkName_ already exists, or if _target_
doesn't exist, an error will be returned.  Otherwise, Tcl creates a
new link called _linkName_ which points to the existing filesystem
object at _target_, where the type of the link is platform-specific
\(on Unix a symbolic link will be the default\).  This is useful for the
case where the user wishes to create a link in a cross-platform way,
and doesn't care what type of link is created.

If the user wishes to make a link of a _specific type only_, \(and
signal an error if for some reason that is not possible\), then the
optional _linktype_ argument should be given.  Accepted values for
linktype are _-symbolic_ and _-hard_.

When creating links on filesystems that either do not support any
links, or do not support the specific type requested, an error message
will be returned \(in particular Windows 95, 98 and ME do not support
any symbolic links at present, but Unix, MacOS and Windows NT/2000/XP
\(on NTFS drives\) do\).

The TIP proposes implementing:

	           Unix,MacOSX      Win-NTFS           MacOS
	symbolic:      yes        directories-only      yes
	hard:       files-only     files-only           no

This also leaves the avenue open, in the future, for the addition of
other link types \(e.g. Windows shortcuts\) through additions to list of
acceptable _linktype_s.  This TIP only proposes adding the above
options.

This means that a general _[file link $linkname $target]_ should
always succeed on the above platforms \(for both files and
directories\), but uses of _-hard_ or _-symbolic_ could fail,
depending on the current platform, and the type of the path.

# Rationale

There are many requests on comp.lang.tcl for this functionality \(see
<http://groups.google.com/groups?dq=&hl=en&lr=&ie=UTF8&oe=UTF8&threadm=4dd3bea3.0206100250.95eeb4e%40posting.google.com&rnum=1&prev=/&frame=on>
for a recent thread\), and if Tcl can read links \(_file readlink_,
_file lstat_\), it really ought to be able to write them.

Discussion has shown that both symbolic and hard links are desirable,
and that for cross-platform use a general-purpose _file link_ which
creates _something_ is useful.

Some users would prefer hard links to be the default, but on balance
most people commenting seemed to prefer symbolic links as default.
This has the added benefit that symbolic links will then be the
default on MacOS, Unix and Windows for everything, _except_ files on
WinTcl \(where hard-links are required\).

# Alternatives

There is no cross-platform alternative available.  TclX provides a
_link_ command for Unix only, and Unix platforms can also use _exec
ln ?-s?_ command to achieve the same effect.

# Reference Implementation

Tcl contains a _testfilelink_ command in _generic/tclTest.c_,
which is a partial implementation used by the test suite.  For a full
implementation of this TIP, including the _-linktype_ switch, see:

_
<http://sourceforge.net/tracker/index.php?func=detail&aid=562970&group\_id=10894&atid=310894>
_

which includes extensive docs and tests.

# Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

